Before you contact Region of Waterloo Public Health review the important updates to symptoms, treatment, and testing.



If you think you are experiencing COVID-19 symptoms use the self-assessment tool to help determine how to seek further care.



If you are having difficulty breathing or experiencing other severe symptoms, call 911. Advise them of your symptoms and travel history, if applicable.

COVID-19 assessment and testing

COVID-19 self-assessment

COVID-19 inquiries

COVID-19 complaints

Waterloo Region COVID-19 summary

On this page

Background

Region of Waterloo Public Health continues to work closely with local hospitals, health care partners, the Ministry of Health, Public Health Ontario and many community partners to respond to Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) in Waterloo Region.

For more information visit the Ministry of Health and the Public Health Agency of Canada.

Symptoms of COVID-19

Symptoms of COVID-19 range from mild - like the flu and other common respiratory infections - to severe. The most common symptoms include fever, cough and shortness of breath.

If you have any symptoms use the self-assessment tool to help determine if you need to seek care or testing. If the self-assessment indicates that clinical assessment is necessary, this tool will connect you to a primary care provider (your own or an on-call provider). You may be referred for in-person assessment and/or testing, if needed.

If you are experiencing symptoms, you must self-isolate at home for 14 days from the day you developed symptoms. You can stop isolating at home after 14 days if you do not have a fever and your symptoms are improving.

Most people with mild symptoms will recover on their own at home and do not require assessment by Region of Waterloo Public Health.

Worsening symptoms

If you develop worsening symptoms (such as worsening cough or fever):

Call your health care provider (if applicable)

Call Telehealth 1-866-797-0000

If Telehealth and your health care provider are both closed/unavailable, call ahead before going to the hospital emergency department

Severe symptoms

If you have severe symptoms (such as severe difficulty breathing, severe chest pain, confusion, or loss of consciousness):

Call 911

Go to the hospital emergency department and advise them of your symptoms and travel history, if applicable

You do not need a phone assessment by Region of Waterloo Public Health to access appropriate healthcare from your health care provider or an emergency department if you are experiencing severe symptoms. Always call ahead when seeking care.

Treatment

There are currently no specific treatments or vaccine that protects against COVID-19.

Most people with mild symptoms will recover on their own at home.

For treatment at home you should:

drink plenty of fluids

get rest and sleep as much as possible

try a humidifier or a hot shower to help with a sore throat or cough

self-isolate

You must self-isolate at home for 14 days from the day you developed symptoms. You can stop isolating at home after 14 days if you do not have a fever and your symptoms are improving.

Use the self-assessment tool to help determine if you need to seek care or testing. If the self-assessment indicates that clinical assessment is necessary, this tool will connect you to a primary care provider (your own or an on-call provider). You may be referred for in-person assessment and/or testing, if needed.

If you are having difficulty breathing or experiencing other severe symptoms, call 911. Advise them of your symptoms and travel history, if applicable.

Testing

Clinical assessment and testing is available for:

Anyone with at least one symptom

Anyone concerned they have been exposed to COVID-19

Anyone who is at risk of exposure to COVID-19 through their employment (e.g. health care workers, grocery store employees, food processing employees)

You do not need a referral from a primary care provider or Public Health to access testing. All the assessment centres take self-referrals. If you would like, you can use the self-assessment tool or speak to your primary care provider, to help determine if you need to seek care or testing.

For assessment and testing information for health care workers please visit our Health Professionals page. If you require urgent care, call 911 or visit the hospital emergency department and advise them of your symptoms and travel history, if applicable.

If you get tested, remain in self-isolation while you wait for your results if you:

have symptoms

are a close contact

have travelled outside of Canada If you do not have symptoms and do not have any possible exposure risk, you do not need to self-isolate while awaiting results. Continue to monitor for symptoms, practice physical distancing, wear a face covering, and wash your hands often. You can review your test results online through the Ministry of Health.

Region of Waterloo Public Health will contact all individuals who test positive for COVID-19. If your test result is negative you should continue to follow the instructions given to you when you got tested.Practice physical distancing, wear a face covering, wash your hands often and continue to self-monitor for symptoms. Get tested again if symptoms develop. Please refer to COVID-19 testing handout for more details.

Returning travellers

The Government of Canada has put in place an Emergency Order under the Quarantine Act that applies to all travellers arriving in Canada in order to slow the spread of COVID-19. All travellers returning from destinations outside of Canada are required to self-isolate for 14 days.

Stay at home and avoid close contact with others, including others at home, for 14 days. Do not go to work, the grocery store or on walks. Exemptions may apply for certain groups, such as health care workers.

If you need groceries or other essential items, have a family member, friend or neighbour do this for you and leave items at the door, or use a delivery service.

If you are experiencing symptoms of COVID-19, use the self-assessment tool or speak to your primary care provider, to help determine if you need to seek care or testing. If you are having difficulty breathing or experiencing other severe symptoms, call 911. Advise them of your symptoms and travel history.

How to self-isolate

Self-isolating at home includes:

Staying at home

No visitors in your home unless essential (e.g. caregivers)

Avoiding contact with others, including others in your home Have food brought to you Use a separate bedroom and bathroom, if possible If a separate bathroom is not an option, clean all surfaces with a disinfectant after use

Keeping at least two metres distance between yourself and others

Washing your hands and covering your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or your sleeve

If you cannot self-isolate from others in your home, everyone in your home will need to self-isolate.

How to protect yourself

Everyday actions can help prevent the spread of germs and viruses like COVID-19:

Practice physical distancing between yourself and people outside your social circle

Wash your hands often with warm water and soap or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer

Wear a face covering in enclosed public places and on transit

Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth

Stay home when you are sick

Sneeze and cough into your sleeve

Avoid contact with people who are sick

Physical distancing

We encourage all residents to practice physical distancing (also known as social distancing). Physical distancing means keeping a distance of 2 metres between yourself and others when you leave your home as well as limiting the number of people you come into close contact with.

Physical distancing includes, but is not limited to:

Limiting non-essential trips out of your home

Maintaining a distance of 2 metres (two arms' length) between yourself and anyone outside of your social circle

Limiting group gatherings

Connecting with family and friends by phone, video chat or social media

Working from home where possible

Staying home when you are sick

Members of the same household or social circle do not need to distance from each other unless they are sick or have travelled within the past 14 days.

When you need to leave your home, make sure to avoid crowds and keep a distance of 2 metres (two arms' length) between yourself and others at all times.

These measures help protect yourself and others in our community. We are all in this together.

Create a social circle during COVID-19

Think of your social circle or 'bubble' as the people you can hug and touch, or those who can become part of your daily and weekly routines.

You can have a social circle of no more than 10 people who can interact with one another without physical distancing.

Everyone living in the same household is in a social circle.

People in the same social circle:

do not have to physically distance

can hug and touch each other

should continue to follow public health advice, including hand washing and staying home and self-isolate if you are sick



Visit create a social circle during COVID-19 for more information.

Staying healthy during COVID-19

Adults and COVID-19 Information about healthy eating, managing stress, physical activity, pregnancy, breastfeeding and more

Children/Teens and COVID-19 Information about healthy eating, managing stress, physical distancing, physical activity and more



Resources

Translated resources

Frequently Asked Questions

Review our list of Frequently Asked Questions.