Coronavirus (COVID-19)

Surrey's Response to COVID-19

Last updated: July 20, 2020 at 11:35 am

As the province moves through its Restart Plan, we’re taking a phased approach that will see programs, services and facilities start to reopen once we are clear that:

we can protect the health, safety and well-being of our staff and residents;

the public demand is there; and

we’ve determined the fiscal implications of any change.

City Hall continues to be by appointment only, while the Operations Centre is closed to the public. In the meantime, we encourage you to use the City’s online services.

For more information on our response to COVID-19, please refer to our 10-Point Action Plan to the COVID-19 Pandemic, which is updated every 2 weeks.

Latest News

On July 14, Stewart Farm began offering guided outdoor tours.

On July 6, small group fitness classes started to be held outdoors in parks.

On July 6, limited outdoor summer camps for children ages 3 to 12 began.

See more closure and opening information.

Read more Surrey-based COVID-19 News & Updates.

Follow us on Twitter @CityofSurrey for COVID-19 announcements as they happen.

Closures & Openings See which City of Surrey facilities are closed, and which ones are set to reopen. COVID-19 News & Updates Get the latest Surrey-based news and updates on how we are responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Online Services See the full list of services available online. Affected City Services Find out what services have been impacted and how to access those available.

Health Information Contact your health care provider, local public health office, or call HealthLink BC at 8-1-1 if you have concerns about your personal health. For information on symptoms, transmission, self-monitoring, self-isolation and prevention, visit: BC Centre for Disease Control

Fraser Health

HealthLinkBC

BC COVID-19 Self-Assessment Tool COVID-19 Resources from Surrey Libraries Library facilities may be closed but they continue to provide valuable information and online resources. Find information on programs supporting individuals, families and businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Also find quality sources of health information in a number of languages. Find more information at the Surrey Libraries website. Online Programs Staying in doesn't have to mean being inactive or bored. City staff are bringing their programming and knowledge to you so you can still get a workout, a story or learn more about Surrey while social distancing at home. See the full list of videos and online programs including all your favourite fitness classes, story times, local artists and more! Shop Online for your Community We're all doing our part right now by staying home, but Surrey's businesses still need your support. Fortunately, many of your favourite local shops are offering delivery online. So if you need groceries, lunch, or something in town, get comfortable, start browsing, and come together for your community by buying local from home. Learn more at SurreyStoreToDoor.ca COVID-19 Business Resource Centre This resource centre provides real-time updates on business resources during the COVID-19 crisis. These resources include business continuity plans, procurement opportunities, employment resources and consolidated financial supports.