On this page

Last updated: Friday July 17 at 12:00 p.m.

Translate this page with Google Translate.

News updates

Visit our news page for previous updates.

Closures and re-openings

Currently open:

Moses Springer outdoor pool

Waterloo City Hall

Waterloo Service Centre

days camps

cricket fields

parks and trails

park activities in open spaces

park bathrooms

park playgrounds

tennis, basketball and outdoor courts

picnic shelters and benches

outdoor sports fields

Bechtel Park dog park

Waterloo Park skate park

Westmount Park

All park activities must follow distancing and gathering size requirements.

Facilities for day camps:

Waterloo Memorial Recreation Complex

RIM Park

Albert McCormick Community Centre

Moses Springer Community Centre

These facilities are open for day camps run by the city and affiliated organizations. They are not open to the general public.

Re-opening soon to the public:

new splash pad in Waterloo Park (early August)

City of Waterloo Museum (starting Friday, July 28)

Closed indefinitely or cancelled:

Bechtel Park Manulife Soccer and Sports Centre (indoor facility only)

indoor recreation facilities

in-person city events

in-person committee meetings

Visiting city hall, service centre and other city facilities

Safety measures are in place if you visit city hall or the service centre. Both facilities are open regular business hours.

Following regional public health advice, masks are not required but recommended if you are unable to maintain physical distancing from others.

City hall services available for walk-in

Municipal enforcement counter (parking tickets, licences)

Revenue counter (paying bills)

City hall services that require appointments

Planning

Building Services

Legislative Services

Community Services

Mayor and CAO's office

Call 519-886-1550 to book an appointment to visit one of these departments.

Other city facilities that are open

City of Waterloo Museum - available for walk-in

Wing 404 - requires an appointment

Adult Recreation Centre - requires an appointment

City hall entrance procedure Anyone who is unwell, has a temperature, left Canada over the last 14 days or exposed to a person who has tested positive for COVID-19 is asked to not come to a city building. a member of our team will greet visitors upon their arrival

you will be required to wear a face covering starting Monday July 13

visitors are asked to line-up

the number of people permitted to enter will be controlled

visitors doing business with the city will be asked to line up along windows on William street side of building (Finance wing)

visitors doing business with a city hall tenant will be asked to line up along windows on Regina side of building (vacant suite)

visitors with pre-scheduled appointments will queued at the appropriate customer service counter

center area of the building is reserved for people to exit

visitors are welcome to use the first floor washrooms

signage and physical distancing markers will be posted City hall capacity To maintain physical distancing queuing and capacity numbers have been established for each customer service counter: Elevator – 1

Revenue – 5

Community Services – 1

Human Resources – 1

Municipal Enforcement – 2

Integrated Planning & Public Works – 2

Legislative Services – 1 person at counter, 1 waiting in hallway

Wedding ceremonies – 9 maximum in Council Chambers

CAO/Elected Officials – 1

Tenants vary by business, will permit 1 or 2, staff will escort the visitor to desired business Service centre entrance procedure Anyone who is unwell, has a temperature, left Canada over the last 14 days or exposed to a person who has tested positive for COVID-19 is asked to not come to a city building. People attending the Service Centre will be required to use the intercom system to notify city staff that they have arrived

Bill payments will be accepted at this location

you will be required to wear a face covering starting Monday July 13 Other city facility procedure Anyone who is unwell, has a temperature, left Canada over the last 14 days or exposed to a person who has tested positive for COVID-19 is asked to not come to a city building. City of Waterloo Museum - available for walk-in: you will be required to wear a face covering

a member of our team will greet visitors upon their arrival

signage and physical distancing markers will be posted Wing 404 - requires an appointment: you must book an appointment to come to the Wing 404, please call 519-888-6356

you will be required to wear a face covering

a member of our team will greet visitors upon their arrival

signage and physical distancing markers will be posted Adult Recreation Centre - requires an appointment: you must book an appointment to come to the Adult Recreation Centre, please call 519-579-1020

you will be required to wear a mask

a member of our team will greet visitors upon their arrival

signage and physical distancing markers will be posted

Changes to City of Waterloo services

Water flushing in your building

Read water flushing guidelines to make sure your building has clean water supply.

Customer service open to calls

Customer service staff will continue to answer phone calls. Please report urgent issues only.

Illegal parking 519-570-9777

Noise complaints 519-570-9777

Water issues 519-886-2310

Roads, sidewalks and trails 519-886-2310

Other issues 519-886-2310

City council meetings online only

Council meetings are fully online. The public can stream meetings live and watch recordings. Feedback can be sent to the city clerk via email.

For times, agenda and streaming links, visit the council calendar.

Senior support programs still operating

Our grocery shopping and telephone reassurance programs continue to operate. These programs are designed for people 65 and up but other people with special needs may qualify.

To inquire, call 519-579-6930 from Monday to Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.

Parking time limits not enforced

Bylaw officers will not enforce overnight parking regulations or on-street time limits. Safety issues such as parking on fire routes will still be enforced

Parking permit fees reduced for July, August and September

Monthly pass holders for uptown parking lots to be charged a reduced fee:

75% reduction for the month of July, paying 25% of the normal fee

50% reduction for the month of August, paying 50% of the normal fee

25% education of the month September, paying 75% of the normal fee

Late payment fees not charged for payments due in April, May and June Late payment fees will not be charged for property taxes, water and all other accounts receivable. Non-sufficient funds fees will not be charged for cheques that do not clear. Bills will continue to be issued during this time, but payments can be deferred to July 1 without penalty. Regular interest charges will resume at that time. No application form is needed. Late fees will be withheld automatically for payments that are not made. Contact revenue@waterloo.ca or 519-747-8718 to cancel a pre-authorized payment or a post-dated cheque already in our possession. Collection of accounts in arrears will be stopped during this period. Uptown patio application fees not charged The Uptown Sidewalk Patio application fee is waived for 2020. Building permit approval and inspections are limited Call 519-886-1550 to book an appointment. Permit applications, issuance and inspections are affected. For full details, visit our building information. Marriage licences no longer needing an appointment Starting July 15 you will not need an appointment to obtain a marriage licence. If you require a marriage licence before July 15 email clerkinfo@waterloo.ca In-person counter service at city hall is open by appointment only. Call 519-886-1550. For details, visit our marriage and oaths. Burial permits by phone only Call 519-747-8777 for service. Freedom of information (FOI) requests by mail or drop off only In-person counter at city hall is closed. We will continue to accept requests via mail or drop off. For details, visit our FOI page. Development application inquiries by email only In-person counter at city hall is available by appointment only. Call In-person counter at city hall is available by appointment only. Call 519-886-1550 to book an appointment.

For details, visit zone changes.

Street sweeping delayed

During the current shutdown, street sweeping will still be maintained, however the service will be delayed.

Residents can assist by removing materials covering catch basins in front of their home (using gloves) and placing it out with their yard waste collection.

Property assessments on hold

The Municipal Property Assessment Corporation (MPAC) has postponed the 2020 Assessment Update.

Enforcement

519-747-8785 to report unlawful gatherings

519-575-4400 to report non-essential businesses still operating

1-888-444-3659 to report price gouging

Refunds

We have processed refunds for cancelled programs and bookings that were scheduled to take place from April 6 to June 30.

Visit our refunds page for full details.

Community support

For a list of local community supports, visit the Region of Waterloo's community support webpage. This includes food delivery, and public spaces open for warming or washroom use.

Waterloo at Home

City staff and community partners have come together to create Waterloo At Home - a curation of helpful tips and resources for residents to make the best of their time at home.

Using Engage Waterloo as the platform, Waterloo At Home is a one-stop-shop for ideas, resources and stories aimed at keeping residents active, connected and creative at home.

City of Waterloo neighbourhood newsletter

We're all neighbours. Now more than ever, sharing information and having points of connection is important.

We publish a weekly email newsletter with information to help you stay informed and socially connected while physically distancing.

Subscribe

Past editions:

To contact the neighbourhoods team during this time, email neighbourhoods@waterloo.ca

Business support

Our economic development office is working with regional partners to monitor and assess developments related to COVID-19 and their impact on businesses in the City of Waterloo.

We have put together a series of resources to help during this time. For questions or additions/changes to the list, please contact ecdev@waterloo.ca or follow us on Twitter or LinkedIn.

The Waterloo Region Small Business Centre and Uptown Business Improvement Area also have helpful resources for local businesses.

Restaurant, cafes and food shops in Waterloo open during COVID-19

If you're looking for restaurants, cafes or food shops to service you during the temporary closures in Waterloo, this list has everything that is open.

If you are a food service business and would like to be added to this list, please apply below.

Apply to be on map

Retail businesses open during COVID-19

If you're looking for clothing and accessory stores, health and personal care, sporting goods and hobbies, electronics, gardening supplies or general merchandise to service you during the temporary closures in Waterloo, this list has everything that is open.

View the full retail map

If you are a retail service business and would like to be added to this list, please apply below.

Apply to be on map

Resources for re-opening your business

Local businesses helping businesses

Shopify: get a retail business online quickly with a three-month trial

Vidyard: free video messaging conferencing tools

Accelerator Centre: free mentoring workshops across Canada

Blackberry: secure connectivity tools free to businesses for 60 days

Call for suppliers to help during COVID-19

Government of Canada resources and programs

As programs are changing regularly, please check Canada’s COVID-19 Economic Response Plan for the most up to date information.

Helping business avoid layoffs and rehiring

Helping businesses access credit



Other business programs

The federal government is working with Canadian lenders to make credit available. The six largest financial institutions have made a commitment to work with personal and small business customers on a case-by-case basis to provide flexible solutions.

Contact your current lending institution for details.

Province of Ontario

Other organizations offering support

Arts and culture support

The city's arts and culture team has put together a series of resources to help during this time.

For further updates, follow us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Advocacy groups with resources

Grants and financial support

Learning resources