

Information from Public Health

Hamilton Public Health Services (PHS) is working to protect the health and safety of our community with our health system partners and Ministry of Health colleagues to ensure we’re responding to this situation as it evolves.

Residents need to be mindful that the situation is continually evolving. People are encouraged to stay at home, only leaving for trips such as groceries or other essential supplies. When outside of the home, ensure you maintain a 2 metre distance (6 feet) from others, wash hands frequently with soap and water, and cover coughs or sneezes with your sleeve or a tissue.

Status of Cases in Hamilton Number of total cases - 881*

Number of confirmed positive cases - 872

Number of probable cases - 9

Number of cases resolved - 821

Number of deaths - 44 *May not include most recent cases from active outbreaks due to lag in data reporting. Data lag due to ongoing investigations related to facility outbreaks. Numbers reflect residents of the city of Hamilton. Numbers accurate as of 9 am on July 22, 2020. Subject to change. Noticeable increases in confirmed cases of COVID-19 being reported for Hamilton are the result of changes to testing criteria and local mass testing events in institutional settings and not necessarily the result of increasing local activity. Changes in daily cases reported should be interpreted with caution. Note: A probable case is a symptomatic individual with travel outside of Canada, or close contact with a known case, or close contact with a person with acute respiratory illness who has recently traveled outside of Canada and for whom laboratory results are not available, inconclusive, or negative; or a symptomatic individual in whom laboratory results are inconclusive. A confirmed case is a person with lab confirmation of COVID-19 infection. COVID-19 Testing Think you have COVID-19 symptoms? COVID-19 testing criteria Hamilton has two COVID-19 Assessment Centres and one drive-through Testing Centre. Accessing test results

Anti-Coronavirus Therapies Study Recruitment for the ACT study is now underway www.phri.ca/ACT-COVID-19

Contact Hamilton Public Health Services for COVID-19 related health info: COVID hotline at 905-974-9848



Send questions to [email protected]

City Operations & Service Information

As part of our emergency preparedness planning, we’re working together with Hamilton Paramedic Services, hospitals, primary care providers, Ontario Ministry of Health colleagues, and academic institutions. This includes implementing a plan to monitor, detect, and if needed, contain and prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus.

We’ve fully activated our Incident Management System which is used to focus attention and resources on urgent issues. This involves the activation of key roles needed to support the current situation as it relates to COVID-19 preparedness.

Affected City Services City facilities are closed to the public until further notice



Many of our City services can be accessed in alternate ways



Services that are not impacted



Choose solidarity

The City of Hamilton values equity and inclusion and works to ensure Hamilton is a place where people of all ages, backgrounds and abilities are accepted and celebrated. Although the COVID-19 outbreak originated in China, this virus is not racially oriented - it is geographically oriented. This means that it does not discriminate among people who can be affected. Unfortunately, during the COVID-19 outbreak, persons of Chinese heritage (and other Asian countries) have voiced concerns about the potential for discrimination. During times like this, people need to support each other and speak out against any instances of discrimination.

Website Disclaimer

The City of Hamilton is providing the information found on this website as a public service. The City is making every effort to ensure the accuracy, currency and reliability of the information. However, because information known about the COVID-19 coronavirus and recommended health and safety measures can rapidly change, the City cannot guarantee that all information is completely current or accurate. All content is subject to change without notice.

The City of Hamilton will not be responsible or liable to any person or business for any loss or damage whatsoever arising out of or based on any use of this website and its information, or any other website to which this site is linked.

This website is not intended to provide individual specific advice, including medical or legal advice. Any questions regarding your particular circumstances should be directed to your own professional advisor(s).