Ministry of Health update



In today’s daily briefing, Dr. Bonnie Henry, provincial health officer, and Adrian Dix, Minister of Health, reported 34 new cases of COVID-19 in B.C., bringing the total number of cases to 3,362 since the pandemic began. Of those, 1,049 have been in the Vancouver Coastal Health (VCH) region. There are 285 active cases of COVID-19 in the province and 2,888 people who tested positive have recovered. The number of people in hospitals throughout B.C. is 17, including three people in critical care. One long-term care facility, and two acute care facilities continue to have active outbreaks in B.C.



Community exposure events



Dr. Henry said the B.C. COVID-19 curve is trending upward and we need to bend it back down to where it belongs. There are several community exposure events and one active community outbreak in B.C. Public health teams are actively contact tracing and requesting the assistance of anyone who may have been exposed to monitor themselves closely and follow public health guidance. Contact tracing three or four people is much faster and easier than trying to reach 20 or 30 people. With each additional person, transmission is greater and more people are at risk, which means more people need to self-isolate and limit contact with others. As a direct result of the recent community exposures, there are close to 1,000 British Columbians who are self-isolating at home, unable to work or even leave their home to enjoy the summer sunshine.



Amended order for bars and nightclubs



Dr. Henry announced that because of increased risks within bars and nightclubs, and the recent links to exposure in these locations, the provincial health officer’s order is being amended. All patrons must now be seated at a designated seat. There is no liquor self-service or dancing, and measures need to be in place to reduce lineups and gathering outside. Changes in the requirements of events have also been made to further reduce the potential for transmission.



Public exposures website



Also today, VCH announced the launch of a new webpage for the public to check for recent exposures at www.vch.ca/COVIDexposures. The lifting of some restrictions, re-opening of businesses and attractions and increased social interactions people are having does increase the number of possible contacts individuals have in the community and can lead to more instances of potential public exposures in the event of positive cases. VCH Public Health teams continue to follow up with all confirmed COVID-19 cases and their close contacts. The public exposures website will be used for situations where Public Health determines there may have been low-risk public exposures of COVID-19 and are unable to contact all possible contacts. The location and specified date and time of these exposures will be posted to www.vch.ca/COVIDexposures. Anyone who has visited the listed locations at the specified times are simply asked to monitor themselves for symptoms and continue with their daily activities. Anyone who develops symptoms, however mild, is asked to call their family doctor or 8-1-1, seek testing and then self-isolate. Notifications related to flights, work sites, cruises, long-distance bus and train travel and public events are posted on the B.C. Centre for Disease Control’s public exposures website.



Safety plans



VCH Environmental Health also continues to work with WorkSafeBC to help businesses and facility operators develop safety plans and provide support in complying with Provincial Health Officer Orders. COVID-19 safety plans templates for restaurants, cafes, pubs and personal service establishments such as salons, along with other resources such as checklists for farmers’ markets, are available at www.vch.ca/COVID-19. Guidance documents that VCH has prepared for licenced businesses during the pandemic can be found under the Environmental Health section of our Vancouver Coastal website at www.vch.ca. Additional information can be found on the WorkSafeBC and BC Centre for Disease Control websites.



Provincial state of emergency extended



Yesterday, the B.C. government formally extended the provincial state of emergency, allowing Mike Farnworth, Minister of Public Safety and Solicitor General, to continue to use extraordinary powers under the Emergency Program Act to support the Province's COVID-19 pandemic response. The state of emergency is extended through the end of the day on Tuesday, Aug. 4, 2020, to allow government to continue to take the necessary actions to keep British Columbians safe. Actions taken in the previous two weeks to support British Columbians include:



- releasing an economic and fiscal update for 2020-21 to provide a summary of COVID-19 investments to date, as well as a scenario of revenue and deficit projections;



- extending the temporary authorization that permits food-primary and liquor-primary licensees to sell and deliver sealed, packaged liquor products alongside the purchase of a meal for off-site consumption during the COVID-19 pandemic; and



- laying out the details of a repayment framework to be put in place later this summer, helping renters and landlords to transition and tenants in arrears to maintain their housing when the ban on evictions for non-payment of rent is lifted ahead of Sept. 1, 2020.



The extension of the provincial state of emergency is based on recommendations from B.C.'s health and emergency management officials. Farnworth made the original declaration on March 18, 2020, the day after Dr. Bonnie Henry, provincial health officer, declared a public health emergency.



Testing

Anyone in the VCH region with cold, influenza or COVID-19-like symptoms, however mild, can now be assessed for and get a COVID-19 test. Contact your physician or nurse practitioner's office, or a local community collection centre to arrange for a test. Phone numbers and locations of collection centre can be found by visiting: http://www.bccdc.ca/health-info/diseases-conditions/covid-19/testing or by calling 8-1-1. In Vancouver, the City Centre and REACH urgent and primary care centres can provide testing as well as the St. Vincent's drive-up location at 4875 Heather Street. The Richmond Assessment Centre is located at 6820 Gilbert Road, in the parking lot of the Richmond Tennis Club. On the North Shore, testing is available at the North Vancouver Urgent and Primary Care Centre. If you think you need testing, please call ahead before visiting your doctor, urgent and primary care center or health clinic.



VCH Medical Health Officers, our provincial partners and the Public Health Agency of Canada continue to actively monitor the COVID-19 pandemic. To protect yourself while out in public, wash your hands frequently and maintain social distance. For more information on COVID-19, please visit www.vch.ca/COVID19.



For more information and latest updates on COVID-19, follow the BC Centre for Disease Control on Twitter @CDCofBC or visit the website: http://www.bccdc.ca/.

