July 20 – Special statement from Dr. Brent Moloughney

This past weekend we saw the largest jump in positive cases of COVID-19 since May 2020. Additionally, we have seen an increase in positive cases in younger people with almost half among those in the 20-29-year age group.. Unfortunately, we are also seeing an increase in hospitalizations. Today alone, Ottawa Public Health is reporting 20 new cases, the highest one-day jump since May. Of those 20 cases, a small number are linked to community testing while the rest are due to activities people have engaged in during Stage 2. It has been more than a month since we entered Stage 2 so it is not surprising that we are seeing an increase of cases. What is striking about this data is that these cases are not linked to reopenings, but rather higher risk activities: indoor gatherings where people are not practicing physical distancing, gatherings with people outside their social circle or in some cases people going to work when they have symptoms.These are the behaviours we need to address as we transition into Stage 3 to avoid overwhelming our health care system and taking a step backwards, thereby undoing so much of the hard work that has gotten us this far. We have not entered Stage 3 because the virus is gone. We entered Stage 3 because we were able to take the necessary precautions that have allowed us to keep COVID-19 at a manageable level. It is imperative that we continue to practice public health measures and be COVIDWise as we learn to live with COVID-19. Additionally, assess your own risk when choosing which activities to engage in and ask yourself how you can make it safer. COVID-19 is present in every community in Ottawa, people of all ages are susceptible, and anyone who is infected can spread the virus to others. Safer ways to socialize, to get together with friends and family It’s no secret that changing the way we socialize has been challenging, and Ottawa residents have been incredibly resilient and have done a great job at adapting. As we enter Stage 3, our public health advice has not changed: people are still being asked to limit their contacts to their social circle of the same 10 people (less is better). It is strongly encouraged to limit your gatherings to the outdoors. Wearing a mask in enclosed public spaces is now mandatory. Stay home when you’re sick, seek to maintain a physical distance of two metres at all times from those outside your social circle and wash your hands regularly. It doesn’t mean we must stop seeing our friends and loved ones – those things are important for our mental health - but when we do see them, we must do so with caution, assess the risks and be COVIDWise. It’s too early to see any indications of how we are doing as we enter Stage 3, but what we do know is that our collective actions today will directly impact our future. Any Ottawa resident who feels they need a test, even if they are not showing symptoms, can go for testing at the COVID-19 Assessment Centre or COVID-19 Care Clinics and should not be turned away, unless volumes are significant.

July 17 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

Today as we enter Stage 3 of the province’s recovery plan, I am reflecting on how incredibly significant the changes in the behaviour of residents of Ottawa have been. Your actions have added up to protection against COVID-19 at the population level. By following public health measures like physical distancing, wearing a mask, staying home when you are sick and washing your hands, more people are able to get back to work and access more services. Because the virus is still in our community, we need to continue to take care. With new provincial guidance allowing up to 50 people indoors and 100 people outdoors and more businesses reopening, there are going to be increased opportunities to interact with others and therefore more cases of COVID-19 can be expected. Breaking these chains of transmission to keep the level of virus in the community manageable is our collective goal as we learn to live with COVID-19 into the future. No activity can be made completely safe, so I recommend everyone assess their own risk level before engaging in certain activities. Are you, or are you living with, someone who is at higher risk of complications from COVID-19? Is there something you can do, like wear a mask, to make the activity safer? Do the risks outweigh the necessity of the activity? Choose lower-risk activities that are outdoors, involve physical distancing from others and with smaller groups. Social circles vs gatherings Starting today, gatherings of up to 50 people indoors and 100 people outdoors are allowed in Ontario. However, provincial requirements are to maintain social circles at no more than 10 people. To clarify, social circles are the members of our household plus others (up to 10) where there is close contact, whereas physical distancing is still required for all other gatherings. The rationale is to keep the opportunity for COVID-19 transmission low. Mandatory masks To help limit the spread of COVID-19 and prepare for Stage 3 of the provincial reopening plan, City Council approved a temporary by-law to make masks mandatory in indoor public spaces. This includes restaurants, stores, places of worship, sports facilities, community venues, hotel lobbies and the public areas of City and health facilities. Masks continue to be required on transit and transit property. Evidence continues to build that masks are an additional layer of protection when there is community transmission of the virus, including from asymptomatic people. There are some people who are unable to wear a mask, such as children under two years of age, individuals with breathing or cognitive difficulties and anyone who is unable to remove a mask without help. Proof of exemption is not required and Ottawa Public Health will continue to communicate about this. I ask you to continue to be understanding and compassionate. For those who can wear masks: please do so to help protect those who can’t. Residents are encouraged to continue practicing physical distancing, wash their hands frequently and stay home when sick. Resources for businesses As businesses reopen, we encourage them to seek information from the Business Reopening Toolkit for guidelines related to masks and other ways to avoid outbreaks in workplace. Ottawa Public Health is not approving specific business plans for reopening but is providing proactive advice and addressing questions from businesses as needed. For businesses not yet permitted to open, they can connect with the Provincial government to discuss a reopening plan. For more information on preventing COVID-19 in the workplace, please visit our website.

Learning to live with COVID-19 I realize that for many it may be discouraging to hear that COVID-19 will be with us for the foreseeable future. The idea of living with COVID-19 for several months, even years, can sound overwhelming. It is important to shift to the long-term view and to be realistic. Until there is a vaccine available, we must learn to do things differently to continue to protect each other. Ottawa, you may not realize it, but you are incredibly resilient. Look at how much we have adapted to and accomplished in the last few months! You have learned new ways of living, some of which may seem normal now. I have every confidence that we will get through this new phase. This is in our hands. Please continue to be COVIDWise as we learn to live with COVID-19. It may be a long road, there may be some bumps, but we will continue as the strong community that we have become. We’re in this for the long haul, Ottawa, but we’re in this together.

July 10 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

I want to start by thanking businesses in Ottawa and the community for your constant ability to adapt and support each other as information regarding COVID-19 continues to evolve. The numbers show that we have been successful so far in keeping this virus pinned down. This is not a time to back down or lower our guard as this virus is relentless and still causing infections, particularly when people who are ill do not stay home. Mandatory masks As we have learned, not everyone feels sick when they are infected and so masks are used to help stop transmission from asymptomatic/pre-symptomatic people. This week, I noticed Ottawa Public Health’s (OPH) mandatory mask signage on storefronts across Ottawa. Businesses have been quick to respond to this new directive and I am seeing an increase in the number of residents wearing masks while in enclosed public spaces. This is encouraging and I thank everyone for doing their part to ensure that COVID-19 remains low in our community. Mask use is an important measure to help employees feel more protected in the workplace, and it supports customers in feeling safe enough to go out to stores and support the local economy. Getting our local economy back on track is important for the health of our residents. People need to return to their jobs to be able to support themselves and their family. As we start getting used to entering establishments with masks, businesses will appreciate us treating their employees with civility and respect. This is a time where many are anxious and getting used to change. Please do not direct your frustrations toward businesses or employees. To support businesses with the implementation of a mandatory mask use policy, we have added FAQs to our website along with signage, and a sample policy for businesses to use. Residents can learn more about how to properly wear a mask, and where to purchase a mask at OttawaPublicHealth.ca/masks. Schools Last night I had the privilege of participating in the Ottawa-Carleton District School Board (OCDSB) consultation with parents regarding the reopening of schools in the fall, where I noted my recommendation to balance the risk of COVID-19 transmission with other observed impacts on the health of children, youth and families. Specifically, given the situation in Ottawa now, and if the trends continue, I recommend starting with 5 days of school in-person and working to make this as safe as possible through reasonable and feasible infection prevention and control measures, including rapid responses to stop transmission when infections occur. Existing scientific research regarding children and COVID-19 indicates that children tend to have mildly symptomatic or asymptomatic infections and that they may play less of a role in population-wide transmission than adults, although the evidence is inconclusive. Ottawa children and youth have not been physically present in a school setting since early March and we know that this has been a major cause of stress for families. OPH has been assessing many factors including the impact of the school closures on children, youth and parents, on those working from home, on the return to the workforce of essential workers, including healthcare workers, on mental health, on domestic violence, on the risk of outbreaks and more. Having received significant feedback from Ottawa families regarding the Province’s School Safety Plan for the 2020-21 school year, we are sharing these concerns in our conversations with partners and the province. Taking these considerations in mind, there is mounting evidence related to the harms of children not being in school, at both the individual and community level. The challenge our community is facing is to balance the risk of transmission of the virus with the risks of keeping children home from school. Ongoing evaluation and input from all stakeholders and learning from other jurisdictions that have proceeded with school reopening ahead of us will be important as children return to school, ideally for 5 days a week, with a choice for parents who feel the risk for their family is too high for in-person school, and with extra supports in place. The return to school is a key part of learning to live with COVID-19. Keeping the virus level low in the community by being COVIDWise supports a safer return. Youth and Young Adult COVID-19 focus groups Recently, OPH commissioned a focus group project with an external consultant to ensure that we were hearing a youth perspective about COVID-19. We have learned that youth understand physical distancing and the importance of public health measures, however they have voiced that this pandemic is challenging on their mental health. We are seeing that they listen to friends and family, to sports figures and online personalities. As a community, we can continue to support and encourage them and show them that their efforts are working. We can lead by example and be open to conversation about their experience. OPH is currently working on a communications approach, primarily using Instagram, to continue to share information and engage with youth and young adults in preferred platform. Ticks and mosquitoes Much of our recent focus has been on COVID-19 and our efforts to ‘flatten the curve’. However, as the season progresses, we know there are other infections that pose risks to our health – those spread by black-legged ticks and mosquitos. Just as people in Ottawa are taking measures to protect themselves from COVID-19 infection, residents’ efforts to make tick-checks and avoiding mosquito bites part of our daily routines will help prevent unwanted infections. For more information on West Nile virus and Lyme disease, residents are encouraged to visit our website. In closing, I would like to invite everyone to take part in our new survey. We continue to value community perspectives and need your input to inform our response. We want to know your priorities and how we can help local businesses as we ease up on restrictions. Controlling COVID19 is a community effort and we need to hear your voice. The new survey and forum questions are available on Engage Ottawa Engage.Ottawa.ca/COVID19. This survey will close on July 23rd. Remember – wearing a mask is an added layer of protection to those around you and is not a substitute for other measures like needing to isolate yourself when sick, staying two metres apart from others and exercising proper hand hygiene. We must continue to be compassionate, as not everyone is able to wear a mask. It is important to be COVIDwise and COVID kind. Thank you for doing your part to help each other. You, Ottawa, are saving lives.

July 6 - Joint Statement – Medical Officers of Health from Eastern Ontario Health Unit; Leeds, Grenville and Lanark District Health Unit; Renfrew County and District Health and Ottawa Public Health

Today Medical Officers of Health from Eastern Ontario Health Unit; Leeds, Grenville and Lanark District Health Unit; Renfrew County and District Health and Ottawa Public Health announced a regional approach to the use of masks in their respective jurisdictions.

July 3 - Joint Statement – Mayor Jim Watson and Councillor Keith Egli (Chair of the Ottawa Board of Health)

Over the course of Ottawa’s response to COVID-19, Dr. Vera Etches and Ottawa Public Health (OPH) have encouraged the use of cloth masks when unable to maintain a two-metre physical distance. It is not always possible to know going into an indoor public space whether or not maintaining a two-metre physical distance can occur. It is often dependent upon the nature of the space and the number and actions of others. Additionally, increasing scientific evidence indicates that the use of masks is an important measure to help control the spread of COVID-19. This is why the City of Ottawa will join other municipalities across the Province of Ontario and will mandate the use of cloth masks in many indoor public spaces. The City of Ottawa has engaged in conversations with City partners, neighbouring health units and members of the business community to explore all possibilities for the establishment of a City of Ottawa By-law requiring residents to wear a cloth mask. Following these conversations, the City of Ottawa is confident in moving forward with the decision to mandate cloth mask use in indoor public spaces. In speaking with the members of our business community, we’ve heard from business owners that they are in favour of mandating the wearing of cloth masks in indoor public spaces. This by-law would ensure that all businesses are on a level playing field. The decrease in transmission will benefit our local economy by allowing increased use of our excellent local establishments and greater customer comfort. We believe that one of the many ways to support local small businesses is to do whatever we can, such as wearing a cloth mask, to help them stay open. The motion to institute a by-law ensuring that residents of the City of Ottawa wear a cloth mask that covers their nose, mouth and chin, without any gaping in certain circumstances will be brought up at Council on July 15th. The Motion will be moved by Councillor Egli and seconded by Mayor Watson. Until such by-law is in effect in Ottawa, the four health units in the Champlain region are looking at a regional approach to mandate masks in their respective jurisdictions. More information about this regional approach will be provided at a joint media availability on Monday, July 6 to be held with Medical Officer’s of Health from four surrounding public health units. Ottawa Public Health’s most recent public engagement survey found that the vast majority of residents from Ottawa are willing to have cloth masks use made mandatory in stores in order for them to feel comfortable shopping. Socializing and normalizing cloth masks in indoor public places will help protect our community. According to phase 1 of OPH’s engagement survey, 90 per cent of respondents said that they would willingly wear a cloth mask in order to be allowed access to services. In our phase 2 survey, so far 73 per cent of respondents say they already wear a cloth mask when visiting an indoor public space. In addition, we strongly believe that the benefits of wide-spread cloth mask use will set us up for a better transition into Stage 3. The Province of Ontario states that a transition to Stage 3 will only be allowed if it can be done as safely as possible. The wide-spread use of cloth masks will assist with better protecting Ottawa residents from COVID-19 transmission during the transition to Stage 3. The COVID-19 pandemic is unprecedented and has impacted the way we live, work and play. Information about the virus continues to evolve but what we know today is that wearing cloth masks is a key component to protecting our community from COVID-19. Community spirit is strong in Ottawa. It is important to state that there may be many in our community who won’t be able to wear a cloth mask due to a variety of reasons such as pre-existing medical conditions, being a child under the age of two, being someone who requires accommodation in accordance with the Ontario Human Rights Code or someone who is hearing impaired or who is communicating with a person who is hearing impaired. Please be prepared to see some individuals in public without cloth masks and we ask that you please be respectful. We understand that this a change for many. Be patient. Be kind with yourself and others. Wearing a cloth mask in indoor public spaces is new to many of us and will be an adjustment. We are all in this together. Let’s continue to protect the people who live in our city because wearing a cloth mask is a small sacrifice if it means saving lives and reducing the spread of COVID-19 in Ottawa. My cloth mask protects you, and your cloth masks protects me.

June 29 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

This year, Canada Day is going to look and feel a little different. With no signature events downtown or large community gatherings, you may find yourself finding new ways to celebrate Canada Day. The most Canadian thing we can do is continue to care and protect others by being COVIDWise during Canada Day celebrations. However you choose to celebrate Canada Day this year, I encourage everyone to continue to practice physical distancing, wear a mask when physical distancing is not possible, limit your contacts, stay home if you’re sick and exercise good hand washing hygiene. While provincial emergency orders allow for gatherings of up to 10 people, the fewer close contacts you have the better. While planning your Canada Day activities, keep in mind these considerations to celebrate in a safer way: Try to keep celebrations outdoors in places where physical distancing can be easily followed

Avoid potentially crowded areas like parks or beaches

Celebrate with those inside your social circle; keep your social circle separate from other social circles

Consider the level of risk of your activities for yourself and those in your social circle and household. Certain groups are at a higher risk (older adults, people with weakened immune systems or chronic health conditions) and should take extra precautions. Let’s celebrate our country and our city by protecting the people who live here. Preventing/preparing for a second wave As we continue to move through Stage 2 of reopening, we are continuing the hard work that has allowed us to get here. We are seeing second waves emerge in other parts of the world and, while we are fortunately in a much better position here in Ottawa at this point, we are also at risk of a second wave. We can watch other countries and communities to learn about what works to control COVID19 and adapt approaches to what is appropriate for our city. Currently case numbers are steady, outbreaks are decreasing and we are maximizing testing and contact tracing capacity. This is good news, but the positive case numbers you see updated on our website every day are still just a fraction of the infections truly present in the community. The risk of an increase in COVID19 cases and outbreaks is real. Modelling data shows that a decline of just twenty per cent in public control measures could lead to a second wave. Our actions influence whether a second wave occurs and its severity. Ottawa residents have already shown that they are capable of doing what needs to be done to keep the virus at a manageable level. Masks Our community spirit is strong. According to phase 1 of our engagement survey, the majority of residents (90 per cent) agreed or strongly agreed that they would be willing to wear non-medical or cloth masks in order to be allowed to access services. Three quarters (74 per cent) agreed or strongly agreed that they would be willing to wear a non-medical or cloth mask in the workplace. And preliminary data from phase 2 of our engagement survey which started last Thursday so far indicates that 71 per cent of residents wore a mask in indoor public spaces either “most of the time” or “always” in the last seven days. This percentage has been growing and we continue to observe room for improvement in mask wearing to protect each other. While the data shows that many people are already doing the right thing by wearing a mask, we are seriously exploring our options for making masks mandatory in commercial settings in Ottawa. I am having conversations with the Mayor, our City partners and neighbouring health units to ensure we are well coordinated in our actions and will provide more information before the end of the week. It may be uncomfortable to wear a mask especially with the warmer weather, however wearing a mask will help protect others. If you are able, please wear a mask when going somewhere you cannot guarantee the ability to physically distance. If you’re not sure if where you’re going may require a mask, it’s a good idea to get in the habit of keeping one on your person at all times. My mask protects you and your mask protects me. Wearing a mask is a small sacrifice if it means saving lives. Beaches It is exciting news that City beaches are now open. This is a great way to cool off and enjoy time with those in your household. Our advice is to avoid larger crowds where you are unable to physically distance to protect yourselves and those around you. If you do plan on spending some time at the beach this summer, be sure to remember the COVIDWise basics. Remain cautious of communal areas such as washrooms and high-touch surfaces. More information on water safety can be found on the Ottawa Public Health website. This summer will be different from those past. Still, I hope that you can use this time to create many wonderful memories of a summer of overcoming the challenges of COVID19. Being COVIDWise is key to moving into Stage 3 and beyond. I wish everyone a safe and happy Canada Day.

June 24 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

Based on the most recent modelling update, Ottawa is currently at 68 per cent physical distancing effectiveness. Physical distancing effectiveness describes how fast COVID-19 spreads in Ottawa compared to if there was no physical distancing. In other words, the higher the percentage, the better. If there is perfect or 100 per cent physical distancing effectiveness, there would be no COVID-19 spread. At the beginning of COVID-19 in Ottawa, new cases and hospitalizations doubled every three to four days. As people in Ottawa began to physically distance, the spread of COVID-19 slowed. Currently, hospital admissions are slower than the initial three to four days doubling time, but we have not yet eliminated all COVID-19 growth.​ Everyone's actions have contributed to flattening the curve and have allowed us to move into Stage 2 of reopening. We must stay the course. Be COVIDWise: Wear a mask, Isolate when sick (and seek testing if you have symptoms), Stay two metres apart from others and Exercise proper hand hygiene. It is up to you to make informed decisions and lessen your risk of infection and the risk to people close to you. Being COVIDWise saves lives. Early socio-demographic data On May 8, OPH started collecting socio-demographic data from people diagnosed with COVID-19. A preliminary look at data collected so far tells us that there may be an over-representation of people who are racialized and immigrants compared with Census 2016 data. 66% identified as from a racialized community compared to 26% of Ottawa residents in Census 2016 data

54% are immigrants to Canada while only 24% of Ottawa residents are immigrants in Census 2016 data

Areas in Ottawa with the most diverse communities have rates of COVID-19 almost twice that of areas with the least diversity This preliminary data is consistent with what is being seen elsewhere. We will be working with community partners such as the Ottawa Local Immigration Partnership to understand these numbers. We need to better understand how people’s experiences and life situations are creating this unfair vulnerability to COVID-19 in order to address these differences and barriers. We are expanding our work to collect socio-demographic information from people who were diagnosed with COVID-19 prior to May 8 which will allow us to complete fulsome analysis of the data. Mental health The impacts of COVID-19 extend beyond the infection itself. OPH has been surveying Ottawa residents to understand how people are managing the health and social impacts of COVID-19. In June, we asked about mental health and emotional well-being including sense of community belonging and loneliness. Some of the findings include: 38% reported their overall mental health and emotional well-being as ‘fair’ or ‘poor’ in the last two weeks compared to 9% in 2017 (Canadian Community Health Survey);

52% reported a weak sense of belonging to their local community compared to 30% in 2017;

Nearly 60% of residents reported feeling some sense of loneliness over the last two weeks; and,

1 in 3 reported at least one time in the past two weeks wanting to talk to someone about something on their mind but did not know where to turn. This data will continue to help inform OPH and our partners on how to best support the mental health and wellness in our community. A report with these findings will be available soon. Visit our Mental Health and COVID-19 page and our Resources for First Nations, Inuit and Metis Community Members page for currently available mental health resources. We would like to thank EKOS Research for their collaboration on the survey. Thanks to the team Since the beginning of the COVID-19 response, hundreds of public health and City staff have been working hard to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in Ottawa. In all my years in public health, I have never seen so many people come together and work with such passion and purpose to protect our community. Their continuous commitment and hard work day and night, seven days a week makes me proud to be part of this organization. Thank you to all of OPH and the City for the collective approach. We have worked collaboratively with our partners to keep our community safe and to protect those at higher risk. The combined efforts of public health, local partners and the community are making a difference. Thousands of lives have been saved. Find out more on OPH’s response by the numbers in the Be COVIDWise infographic. Lastly, I would like to acknowledge Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day. This day allows us to celebrate the vital role that the Francophone community has played within Canada since its foundation. We are proudly bilingual and we hope you enjoy yourselves safely today.

June 22 – Special statement from Dr. Sarah Funnell, Associate Medical Officer of Health

Kwey, Aniin, Shé:kon, Ainngai, Taanshi, This past weekend we celebrated both National Indigenous Peoples Day and summer solstice, a time of celebration and new beginnings. Many Ottawans spent the weekend outdoors and enjoyed the beauty of the traditional unceded Algonquin territory. June is also Indigenous History Month, a time to learn about and acknowledge the rich diversity of cultures and traditions of First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. Ottawa Public Health (OPH) is committed to reconciliation. We work in partnership with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities to advance Indigenous health equity and address anti-Indigenous racism. Currently we are working with partners to better understand how COVID-19 is affecting Indigenous communities, including the health and social effects of closures and physical distancing on First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. As part of our pandemic response, OPH has launched a new webpage that highlights COVID-19 resources for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis community members. Resources include information developed by Ottawa Public Health and local, provincial and national Indigenous organizations. Several of the resources are available in a number of Indigenous languages that reflect the diversity of First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples in Ottawa. Please take the opportunity to learn about First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples, anti-Indigenous racism, and to reflect on a personal commitment to address past and current injustices. Meegwetch, Nia:wen, Qujannamiik, Marsee. Updated guidance for businesses and places of worship Just over a week has passed since many businesses and childcare services started to reopen under provincial guidance. OPH continues to monitor and assess the situation as it evolves and is working closely with the business community to provide new tools to support them in reopening safely. Ottawa businesses are working hard and quickly adapting to the new requirements to keep their employees and customers as safe as possible. Let's honour their efforts by being respectful and patient customers that protect the health of employees. Visit our Businesses and Workplace webpage to see the updated guidance documents for businesses as well as a new COVID-19 guidance for places of worship. Be #COVIDWise As we continue to reopen and consistently report low new case numbers, please remember to be COVIDwise. We can continue to flatten the curve as we take advantage of the new opportunities to explore and socialize while COVID-19 is present in our community. W – Wear a cloth mask when you cannot maintain a physical distance of two metres. I – Isolate yourself form others when you are sick (and get tested promptly if you have COVID-like symptoms). S – Stay two metres apart from those outside your household. E – Exercise proper hand hygiene; wash your hands regularly or use sanitizer especially before touching your face. Activities have high to low levels of risk when it comes to spreading the virus. Be COVIDwise by using information available on our website to help choose your activities as we work to keep the virus under control. The community of Ottawa has demonstrated that we are all able to protect each other and keep this virus at a manageable level. But we are not yet on the other side of this which is why being COVIDWise is crucial as we continue to live with COVID-19.

June 17 – Special statement from Dr. Brent Moloughney

Ottawa Board of Health recognizes racism as a public health issue Racism, discrimination and stigma are associated with poor physical, mental and emotional health and higher mortality rates. Anti-black racism, anti-indigenous racism and racism against any minority is an important public health issue. I am pleased to share that this week, the Ottawa Board of Health unanimously approved a motion that recognizes racism as a public health issue and will direct Ottawa Public Health’s (OPH) work in addressing racism in public health. This motion included directives to: Provide training on anti-black racism and other racism to employees, volunteers and learners to contribute to improve health outcomes.

Develop an evidence-based campaign to increase awareness on the impacts of racism and discrimination.

Establish a process in collaboration with First Nations, Inuit and Metis partners to ensure respectful planning, collection, analysis and sharing of health data to inform improvements to physical and mental health of indigenous populations in Ottawa.

Inform community consultations on addressing systemic racism in Ottawa. OPH is committed to engage and work with residents, partners and communities to develop the conditions to support health and health equity for everyone in Ottawa. In addition to partnerships to help us move in a direction that will lead to meaningful change, we will engage with Councilor Rawlson King, the council Liaison for Anti-Racism and Ethnocultural Relations Initiatives for the City of Ottawa. COVID-19 Weekly supplemental report As you are aware, last week OPH introduced its new COVID-19 dashboard. Additionally, supplemental COVID-19 epidemiology reports are made available on our website. These include the most current information available from the dynamic disease reporting system as of 2 p.m. the day before posting. Some weeks, there will be a Special Focus included in a Weekly Supplement that will provide a brief analysis of a topic of interest. Today’s supplemental report provides more information about the occupations of individuals diagnosed with COVID-19. Information on the occupations of those infected with COVID-19 can improve our understanding of who may be at higher risk and how the disease is spreading. While this report does not suggest exposure sites, this is information that is collected during the case management process. Among occupational groups, healthcare workers have had the greatest number of infections to-date. It’s important to note that the testing of healthcare workers and essential workers has been prioritized compared to the rest of the population. As we continue to ease restrictions, everyone is encouraged to be vigilant, regardless of their occupation. OPH will continue to monitor trends as more settings re-open. Stage 2 reopening As many businesses continue to reopen and we increase our activities, OPH will continue to monitor the level of infection in the community. It will take a period of weeks before we can assess the impact of reopening. Looking at the latest data, the trends are positive across all the recovery indicators of our COVID-19 dashboard, though we are still finding cases that have no known source of infection. This means that these cases are not linked to travel, an outbreak or another known case. Since we are reopening while COVID-19 is present in our community, more widespread transmission risks a resurgence of the virus, which could again threaten the health of vulnerable individuals and surpass our hospitals’ capacity. We each need to continue to do our part to prevent transmission of the virus. With reopening, we are faced with more choices of what we might do. However, not all activities have the same risk for transmission. In general, being outside is better than inside, the fewer our contacts the lower the risk, and physical distancing continues to be of primary importance. Being COVIDwise will help prevent transmission for yourself, your family and others. This includes: wear a cloth mask when you cannot maintain physical distance with others, isolate yourself and get tested when you are sick, and wash your hands regularly. Whether as a participant in an activity, or a close contact of another who is participating, particular caution is needed for vulnerable individuals at increased risk of serious outcomes if they become infected. See our COVIDwise webpage for more information on risk categories of different types of activities, as well as how to be COVIDwise.

June 12 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

T oday, we enter Stage 2 of the province’s recovery plan. We achieved this together, Ottawa. And I am incredibly proud of the people of Ottawa for getting us here. The reality is that this isn't the end. We must all continue cautiously to prevent infections and keep the virus at a manageable level in our community. Testing and follow-up is not enough to control the virus; we must prevent transmission in the first place. That’s why I am asking each and every one of you to continue to be COVID wise. W – Wear a cloth mask when you cannot maintain a physical distance of two metres. I – Isolate yourself form others when you are sick (and get tested promptly if you have COVID-like symptoms). S – Stay two metres apart from those outside your household. E – Exercise proper hand hygiene; wash your hands regularly or use sanitizer especially before touching your face. As we enter Stage 2 and resume some of our activities, being able to assess your individual situation and the associated risks and make informed decisions is key. Because what is permissible under the provincial order will continue to change and does not address all possible scenarios, some confusion may result. There are differences between what is legally allowed and what is recommended. I appreciate that for some people this may cause a level of anxiety. OPH is here to help residents through any uncertain times by emphasizing the principles to decrease risk that do not change. The province is now allowing group gatherings to increase from five to 10 people. And earlier today the province announced guidance on how to establish a social circle with those outside your household. No matter what, it is still wise to limit your contacts and keep gatherings to fewer people and to the same group of people over time. Try to keep your activities outdoors. And, assess your own unique situations and associated risks – for example, whether you are or live with someone who may be at higher risk of serious complications from COVID-19. We have heard concerns from adults over 70 years old that they are not sure which activities they can or should resume. Just like everyone else, you need to assess your own risk as older adults are more vulnerable to this virus and keep in mind the principles of reducing the risk of transmission. We continue to work with our City of Ottawa partners to provide more guidance on how to safely resume business. We have contributed to the City’s business toolkit, provided specific guidance for restaurants, businesses that provide personal services and will be holding a variety of workshops over the next several weeks for different businesses like day camps and childcare services, construction and manufacturing, offices and professional services, retail and vehicle dealerships and more. Our local businesses sacrificed much by staying closed or reducing services to help limit the spread of COVID-19. Let's honour their efforts by being respectful and patient customers that protect the health of employees. Let's learn to be COVID-wise: visit OttawaPublicHealth.ca/COVIDwise for more information. Visiting long-term care homes Yesterday the Province of Ontario announced that visits will be allowed to resume in long-term care and retirement homes starting June 18 with certain limitations. For example, a home must not be in outbreak, must have established visitor protocols in place and must maintain the highest infection prevention and control standards. Only outdoor visits will be permitted during this first phase, and only one visitor at a time per resident. According to the provincial Ministry of Long-Term Care policy, visitors will be required to pass active screening every time they visit, confirming with staff that they have tested negative for COVID-19 within the previous two weeks. Visitors should consider their personal health and susceptibility to the virus in determining whether visiting a long-term care home is appropriate. It is important to note that homes can decide if they want or need to continue prohibiting visits, and if so, they should continue to offer virtual visits. The actions of one visitor that may unknowingly introduce COVID19 into a home could lead to extremely negative consequences, so utmost care is important. The role that families, visitors and loved ones play in providing care-giving and emotional supports is important for the quality of life and health for residents in long-term care homes and must be balanced with mitigating the risk of death for residents. More information on long-term care home visits can be found at ontario.ca. Daily COVID-19 dashboard Data plays an important part in helping to guide us in our community response with recommendations as we move forward into new stages of reopening. Earlier this week we launched our new Daily COVID-19 Dashboard, a live interactive tool that is updated daily as data becomes available from the COVID-19 Ottawa Database. This dynamic tool serves as your primary source of up-to-date information on COVID-19 cases, outbreaks and core indicators for local monitoring. The new tool provides a comprehensive snapshot of information that was previously housed in more than one place. You can still find archived reports prior to June 10 on our website, however, moving forward you will be able to use the interactive dashboard to find current information. My team has developed a guide to help users understand how to use the tool. The guide is available on the website in the same location of the dashboard. We welcome your feedback as we continue to prioritize transparency and share information with the public. My focus and Ottawa Public Health’s role is to provide guidance and help you make informed decisions to keep our City healthy. With ongoing caution, we can get back to more of the things we enjoy safely. Stay safe and be COVIDWise.

June 10 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

Ottawa Public Health (OPH) has launched a new dynamic reporting tool to compliment the COVID-19 Dashboard. This tool will provide up-to-date information on COVID-19 cases, outbreaks and core indicators to assess the situation in Ottawa. The new tool provides a comprehensive snapshot of information that was previously housed in more than one place. To facilitate access we have streamlined information into one interactive daily report and a weekly supplement. OPH prides itself on its transparent reporting of information. We welcome your continued feedback on our reports and the way we are presenting information to the public. Societal Impacts survey​ In March, we completed the first wave of a population-level survey looking at perceptions and practices in Ottawa during the COVID-19 response. We recently completed a second wave of questions for the public about mask use, hand hygiene and physical distancing practices. The majority of Ottawans report wearing masks indoors, washing their hands before eating, and maintaining a distance of 2 metres from others when indoors. These measures will prevent transmission of COVID19 in our community and are important to continue. By learning more about how Ottawa residents are managing through this time, we are better equipped to work with the community to provide supports where needed. ​ ​​OPH thanks the team at EKOS Research Associates for their collaboration on these two survey streams. ​ Entering Stage 2 With the provincial announcement of Stage 2 “reopening” starting on Friday June 12 in Ottawa, many questions have been raised as people try to grasp the nuances and how it impacts their ability to see their families and socialize. While the province has said we can now gather in groups of 10 or less, physical distancing is still required when meeting with people outside your household to limit transmission of COVID-19, as there are still cases arising in the community with no known exposure. Furthermore, limiting your number of contacts to the same small group of people as much as possible will add to our ability to keep the level of COVID-19 transmission under control. We have to continue to be cautious with reopening; with each additional opportunity to interact with others, there is an increased risk of virus transmission. I am confident that we can enter Stage 2 with ongoing care. The data shows that Ottawa residents have heard our public health messaging loud and clear, and it is your actions that have allowed us to transition into this new stage. Cases, hospitalizations and outbreaks have all decreased. Hospital capacity is positive. We are on target with contacting cases and their follow up. Testing volume is up and the percentage of tests that are positive is down. We have gotten this far, and we cannot let up on our efforts to control the virus. The future is in our hands, Ottawa. Be COVIDWise: Wear a mask, Isolate when sick (and seek testing if you have symptoms), Stay two metres apart from others, and Exercise proper hand hygiene. Everyone’s actions have helped keep the transmission of the virus down and prevent our healthcare system from becoming overwhelmed. As we enter Stage 2, it’s up to you to make informed decisions and lessen your risk of infection and the risk to people close to you. Stay the course Ottawa. We are in this together.

June 8 – Special statement from Dr. Vera Etche s

On Friday, June 5, Ottawa Public Health posted a social media message that may have caused some confusion with regards to COVID-19 and immunity. My message to the public continues to be that we do not have enough information to definitively say how long people are immune to COVID-19 after infection with the virus. The information previously posted on our website that indicated that people who have recovered from COVID-19 likely have some protection from re-infection was removed as soon as OPH became aware that information was not as clear as it could have been. Our website has since been updated to reflect the latest information we have about immunity. There is no conclusive evidence of people being re-infected with COVID-19 at this time. As the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 illness (the virus itself is called SARS-CoV-2) was discovered in January, scientists and researchers are still in the process of studying the virus and its antibodies. More evidence and information regarding re-infection is anticipated in the coming weeks and months. What we do know is that people who have recovered from COVID-19 infection have some antibodies to fight future COVID-19 infections but it is not yet known how long this immunity will last. As such, we encourage all residents to continue following public health recommendations to limit the spread of transmission and we need to continue to consider that any individual we encounter may be at risk for infection. I know that residents rely on us for timely and accurate information on all public health matters. We apologize for any confusion this caused. Information regarding COVID-19 is changing every day and we do our best to ensure we are providing the most accurate, up to date, information available. I am incredibly proud of the team at OPH whose tireless and unwavering communications efforts have without a doubt directly contributed to saving thousands of lives here in Ottawa. Regional reopening Today the Ontario government announced that it is moving forward with a regional approach to Stage 2 of reopening the province. Based on the trends of key public health indicators such as lower rates of transmission, increased capacity in hospitals and progress made in testing, the province is easing restrictions in communities where it is safe to do so, including Ottawa. These changes will be effective June 12, 2020. These changes include increasing the size of gatherings from five people or less to 10 or less and the reopening of more businesses and public spaces including hair salons, patios, outdoor recreation facilities, shopping malls and places of worship. We are currently reviewing the approach and how it impacts us here in Ottawa and I am confident that we can enter Stage 2 with ongoing care. The data shows that Ottawa residents have heard our public health messaging loud and clear, and it is your actions that have allowed us to transition into this new stage. Thank you to our laboratory technologists and technicians In the past, I have acknowledged various professionals working the frontline in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Today, I want to highlight the integral role of medical laboratory technologists and technicians for their response to COVID-19. Since day one of the pandemic, they have been working with COVID-19 patients taking samples and processing tests within our community to combat the spread and flatten the curve. Without these essential workers, COVID-19 and many other diseases cannot be diagnosed which is crucial information to allow doctors, nurses and other health care professionals to treat patients, and for public health contact tracing to prevent further spread. Thank you for your devotion and continued work in the background of this massive undertaking to manage COVID-19. For more information about this group please refer to mlpao.org. Testing is an important step in preventing further transmission of the virus in our community. Since laboratory capacity has been able to expand, testing for COVID-19 is now available to anyone who thinks they may have been at risk for exposure to the infection. OPH strongly recommends that anyone with symptoms of COVID-like illness present for testing soon as possible after feeling ill. Be COVID wise Through everyone’s actions, we have been successful in reducing the number of infections that would have otherwise occurred. Overall, we estimate that only a small percentage of Ottawans have been infected with COVID-19 to date, therefore the vast majority of us remain susceptible to infection. The new cases and hospitalizations we report mean that the virus is still present in our community. As we continue along the path to resume activities and sometimes adopt new approaches to work and service provision, OPH will be carefully monitoring the impact on infection rates in our community and communicating trends in our daily epidemiology dashboard. The people of Ottawa have successfully kept the virus to a manageable level in our community and this is the ongoing goal into the future. We encourage all residents to continue following public health recommendations to limit the spread of transmission: practice physical distancing, wash your hands frequently, avoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth with unwashed hands and wear a mask when physical distancing is not possible. As groups of 10 will be permitted, limiting your number of contacts to the same group of people as much as possible will add to our ability to keep the level of COVID-19 transmission under control. Thank you for your continuing care.

June 5, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches and Dr. Brent Moloughney

Some people have been describing this week’s marches as a conflict between democracy and protecting the health of the population. I don’t see it that way. There are two challenges to the health of the population that are raised by the marches. And, one of them has far deeper roots and has had negative impacts on public health for far longer than the other. Anti-black racism and racism against minorities makes our population less healthy. Racism, discrimination and stigma are associated with poorer physical, mental and emotional health and greater mortality. My job is to not only control infectious diseases but also to promote the health of the population by working with others to ensure fair opportunities for health. We have seen how COVID-19 has stigmatized certain racialized groups. According to a recent report published by Public Health Ontario on COVID-19 and diversity, the most ethno-culturally diverse neighbourhoods in Ontario, primarily those concentrated in large urban areas, are experiencing disproportionately higher rates of COVID-19 and related deaths compared to neighbourhoods that are the less diverse. The rate of COVID-19 infections in the most diverse neighbourhoods was three times higher than the rate in the least diverse neighbourhoods. And people living in the most diverse neighbourhoods were also more likely to experience severe outcomes (hospitalizations, ICU admissions and deaths) than people living in the least diverse neighbourhoods, even after controlling for age and population concentration: hospitalization rates were four times higher

ICU admission rates were four times higher

death rates were twice as high We need better data to understand how racism is affecting people’s health. We are working with groups such as the Ottawa Local Immigration Partnership and with health system partners to collect race and ethnicity data in order to better understand the barriers to health and healthcare in Ottawa, and health outcomes for people who are racialized. People have had disproportionately difficult impacts on their lives and it is important for people to have a voice within our democracy to counter racism. Today, I am finding virtual ways to express my support and continuing work within my institution to make changes to address anti-black racism and racism against minorities. Ottawa Public Health is focusing on work that we all need to do to change how our programs and services support people who have the least advantage and are harmed by racism. Today, I encourage you to take action by learning more about what is happening in our community, and about how racism affects the health of our population. Speak to your children about racism. Speak out when you see racism happening and recognize when even you yourself might be guilty of stereotyping or bias. When we have privilege we need to work to grow the opportunities for people who have less. And ensure voices of people with less advantage are heard. We understand that people are hurting. We are listening. As for the other risk to the health of our population raised by the marches – COVID-19 – large numbers crowding within two metres of others does create a high risk for transmission of the virus. OPH is providing information to make sure people make the decision to march in an informed way. Be as safe as possible if you are marching today. Stay home if you are ill and make sure you present for testing if you develop symptoms of illness in the two weeks following participating in the march. Thank you for continuing to limit the number of contacts that you have as much as possible. Your work to physically distance in the days following the march continues to be important to limit deaths due to COVID-19. United Way – #FacingForward mask project Together with Ottawa Public Health, United Way recently launched their #FacingForward project. As we continue to strongly recommend the use of cloth masks when physical distancing is not possible, we recognize that for many acquiring a cloth mask isn’t as easy as it sounds. Whether it’s poverty, homelessness or isolation that make getting a mask a challenge, we need to fill those gaps and ensure everyone has what they need to keep our communities healthy. We are asking the community to help in three different ways where possible: You can buy, give or even make masks. We are committed to making sure that every person in the community is protected. More information can be found on the United Way’s website - unitedwayeo.ca/facing-forward Be COVID wise It goes without saying that 2020 has been a different and difficult year for all of us. The more we start to interact in public again, the more mindful we must be of our actions to prevent the transmission of COVID-19. Through everyone’s actions, we have been successful in reducing the number of infections that would have otherwise occurred. Overall, we estimate that only a small percentage of Ottawans have been infected with COVID so far, perhaps as low as one per cent, but possibly a bit higher. Regardless of the specific number, the key implication is that the vast majority of us remain susceptible to infection. The new cases and hospitalizations we report mean that the virus is still present in our community. In order to track cases within Ottawa and to limit transmission, please seek testing if you think you may be infected with the virus. As more activities become possible, the new normal will be to consider how risky an activity is and how you can reduce the risk of transmission for yourself, your family and others. In general, outdoor activities are less risky than indoor ones. The more people that are involved, and the closer the contact, the higher the risk. Another important consideration is whether any of the individuals or the people in their households are at risk of serious outcomes if they become infected. As our city reopens, we are asking the public to be COVID wise and assess the risk of your chosen activity. Assess the situation, consider whether the activity is lower or higher risk, or somewhere in-between, and whether physical distancing can be maintained. Wearing a cloth masks is an important strategy when distancing cannot be maintained. For extra help on low- to high-risk activities, please see the OPH website for more information. The overarching need to prevent transmission of COVID-19 is of utmost importance as we get back to activities. We are in this together in every way. Everyone within the community continues to have a role to play in preventing spread of the virus and we thank you for all of your efforts to do so.

June 3, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Brent Moloughney

Racism and COVID-19 Recent events in the news involving racial violence have left many Ottawa residents and Canadians hurt, angry and looking for answers. Much of the attention has focused on the United States, but with our proximity to the US and our own continuing issues with racism, this has led to protests across our nation as well. Racism is a public health issue and Ottawa is not immune. Sadly, with the emergence of COVID-19, we have seen rising racism, xenophobia, discrimination, hate incidents and crimes targeting our Asian communities globally and here in Canada. As a virus, COVID-19 does not discriminate. Anyone can be infected. Evidence has shown that certain groups may be more impacted by COVID-19 than others due to broader health and social factors that increase the risk of contracting the disease and of being able to protect others. COVID-19 affects us all, but some people are facing incredibly difficult circumstances and hardships. Support, kindness and compassion is what we need now. As an organization, Ottawa Public Health (OPH) has been proactive in assessing how to better educate our staff on the issues relating to racism regarding health and access to care. We are working with our City partners to confront and address systemic racism throughout our community. Marches are taking place all over the world this week including here in Ottawa. We understand that people want to gather to march and express themselves. If you are planning on joining the crowds to march this week, please do so responsibly by taking steps to keep yourself and other participants as safe as possible to reduce the risk of transmission: Maintain physical distancing of at least two metres when possible

Wear a cloth face mask at all times

Bring hand sanitizer with you and also wash your hands upon returning home

Avoid touching your face

Consider alternatives to yelling and shouting to avoid spreading droplets

Clean any materials that you carried during the march

As always, while COVID-19 is circulating in the community, monitor yourself for symptoms and if any symptoms develop, get yourself tested right away. If you are more susceptible to serious complications if you contract COVID-19 (e.g. older adult, have chronic illnesses or are immunocompromised), reconsider the need to be present in a large crowd and perhaps find a way to participate virtually. I would also add that if you have a vulnerable person in your household, you should also consider participating virtually. And if you are sick, please stay home. Reducing the risk of transmission Last week, we launched the Ottawa COVID-19 Dashboard to provide up-to-date information on core indicators for local monitoring and informing reopening decisions. This public dashboard, which is updated daily, will hopefully help residents better understand the situation and the impact of their actions. Each of us matter and each of us will help determine the trajectory of the number of infections in our community and the opportunity for more businesses and settings to re-open. As more places open, it is easy to think the virus has gone away. But it remains in our community. So, when you are in a public setting (indoors or outdoors), it is important to maintain physical distancing of at least two metres and wear a cloth mask when necessary. The more we start to gather in public again with the opening of businesses and outdoor spaces, the more mindful we must be of our actions as we learn to live with COVID-19 in our community. When outdoors, use caution when: Passing others. Sidestep, pass quickly and courteously, and/or stagger yourselves to not be directly behind others when walking, running, cycling and other outdoor activities.

Spending time with others. Keep visits outdoors (including your backyard or driveway) with people who are not part of your household. In indoor settings, use caution and routinely apply the principles of physical distancing, mask use, and washing your hands before and after activities such as: Using public transportation including buses and taxis

Grocery and retail shopping and farmers’ markets

Attending medical appointments

Ordering take-out food and curbside pick-up

Allowing service providers in your home for renovations, cleaning, maintenance, etc. View our Be COVID Wise: Understand Your Risks during COVID-19 poster for additional information about red, least safe options and green, safer options.

June 1, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches

Ethnicity and COVID-19 Some evidence has shown that certain groups may be more impacted by COVID-19 than others; not only by contracting the disease itself, but due to broader health and social impacts of the pandemic. For example, we are seeing that racialized communities have been disproportionately impacted – that they may be more at risk to contracting COVID-19 but also that they have faced prejudice, racism and discrimination, sadly in some cases by verbal and physical assault. These situations are emotionally challenging. COVID-19 affects us all, but some people are facing incredibly difficult circumstances and hardships. Support, kindness and compassion is what we need now. Ottawa Public Health is working to collect ethnicity and income data to understand risks of exposure among different groups in Ottawa. We are also working with the Human Needs Task Force and partners such as the Ottawa Local Immigration Partnership to ensure that people have access to services and social supports and to counter effects of racism, poverty and social and education disparities to promote health and safety for everyone in our community. OPH is exploring opportunities to collaborate with the City’s Anti-Racism Directorate with Councillor Rawlson King. We are working with partners to develop a campaign to increase awareness of the impacts of racism and discrimination. June marks the start of National Indigenous History Month, an opportunity to learn about and celebrate Indigenous heritage, diversity and culture while acknowledging and reflecting on the achievements of First Nations, Inuit and Métis people. OPH is committed to Reconciliation. We work in partnership with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities to advance Indigenous health equity. Currently we are working with partners to better understand how COVID-19 is affecting Indigenous communities and uncover the true impacts including the health and social effects of closures and physical distancing on First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities. Take care of yourself, talk to someone you trust, try to unplug from media or choose a specific time of the day to check the news. Reach out to the Distress Center of Ottawa (613-238-3311) if you need someone to talk to or visit OPH’s Mental Health and COVID-19 webpage for additional mental health resources. Vigilance with reopening For many, the recent shift in both warmer weather and the reopening of businesses means a shift in our daily activities. We’re outside more, we’re running more of our usual errands and we’re therefore encountering more opportunities to interact with others. While more interactions means increased risk, we can fortunately reduce the risk if we each play our part in preventing the spread of infection. To date, physical distancing has been a key component of our response to the virus. As we slowly loosen the restrictions that have been in place for the last several weeks, it will be critical that we continue to stay two metres away from others and, when we can’t, that we wear a cloth mask, especially indoors and on public transit systems. We all have a responsibility to do our part in preventing transmission not only to protect ourselves but also our health care system, and at-risk populations. Last week we launched the Ottawa COVID-19 Dashboard. This tool gives us a snapshot of the COVID-19 situation in Ottawa and provides up-to-date information on core indicators for local monitoring and informing reopening decisions. It includes four sections: (1) Virus Spread and Containment; (2) Health Care System Capacity; (3) Public Health; and (4) Testing and Tracking. Collectively, we want all four areas to show capacity and progress. If over time the trends continue as they are, that would be very positive. Our collective actions will determine the trajectory and we will continue to monitor these trends closely. The people of Ottawa deserve credit for following the protocols that have been put in place to protect ourselves, our loved ones, our neighbours and our friends. Stay the course, Ottawa: your actions are making a difference. Provincial testing strategy Ottawa continues to follow guidance provided by the Ontario Ministry of Health regarding testing. The Ontario government recently announced the next phase of its COVID-19 testing plan, Protecting Ontarians Through Enhanced Testing. The provincial plan includes three branches of testing: assessment centre testing with expan ded criteria to include asymptomatic individuals.

targeted campaigns with expand ed surveillance testing for vulnerable populations not showing symptoms , including in long term care homes, congregate settings, and workplaces in priority sectors.

outbreak management with testing to ensure rapid and agile response capacity in specific neighbourhoods and regions or at hospitals, institutions and workplaces . Ottawa health care providers are working together to follow this three-part approach as well. OPH’s role in the testing strategy is to inform the testing approach with the lens of access for less-advantaged populations, as well as if clusters or outbreaks are identified. The Champlain Health Region Incident Command oversees the operational side (i.e. the actual testing) and implements the assessment centre and targeted campaigns, such as testing in long-term care homes. Any Ottawa resident who feels they need a test, even if they are not showing symptoms, can present for testing. In addition to the COVID-19 Assessment Centre and Care Clinics, some family doctors’ offices are providing this service, and mobile services are available for populations with need. OPH still recommends using the COVID-19 self-assessment tool if you are worried you were exposed to COVID-19 or have symptoms. I would like to caution everyone that a negative test does not mean that you have “beat” the virus and that you are not at risk of getting COVID-19 at a later date. We still have community spread of COVID-19 in Ottawa. We must continue to practice physical distancing, wear a cloth mask when physical distancing is a challenge, and wash our hands regularly. These simple actions will help prevent the spread of COVID-19 and keep us safer. Seniors Month June is Seniors Month in Ontario, an opportunity to celebrate the significant contributions that older adults make to our families, our community and our society. We recognize that these are very challenging times for older adults as they continue to self-isolate due to the risk of COVID-19. I want to encourage everyone to consider the older adults in your life, not only this month, but always. Give them a call. Write them a letter – anything to show that you are thinking of them and that you care. Ottawa Public Health is excited to be collaborating with the Council on Aging of Ottawa and the National Association of Federal Retirees to offer the Let’s Talk COVID-19 & Reopening with Older Adults event. This moderated session will include greetings from Mayor Jim Watson and our partners, the Council on Aging of Ottawa and the National Association of Federal Retirees, followed by a Q&A session where I will personally address your questions regarding COVID-19, reopening and what this means for older adults. When: Wednesday June 3, 2020 at 1 pm Who: Mayor Jim Watson

Sarah Bercier, Executive Director, The Council on Aging of Ottawa

Linda Barber, Ottawa Branch Manager, National Association of Federal Retirees

Dr. Vera Etches, Ottawa Public Health Please join us online for this exciting Facebook Live event here: www.Facebook.com/AgingWellInOttawa or on YouTube via the OPH website: www.OttawaPublicHealth.ca/Coronavirus. A Facebook account is not needed to join the event.

May 29, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches and Dr. Brent Moloughney

Dr. Vera Etches First, I would like to begin by expressing my condolences to the family and friends of the personal support worker who recently passed away from the Madonna Care Home. Our thoughts are with you. The Ottawa community has understood well the extraordinary measures required to avoid a health system catastrophe from COVID-19 infections increasing too quickly. Because of Ottawans taking precautions, we are seeing results. We can start to get back to work and access more services. Thank you for continuing to observe recommendations through this challenging time. Testing The Champlain Health Region Incident Command (CHRIC) oversees COVID-19 testing centres and the Eastern Ontario Laboratory Association. Ottawa Public Health (OPH) is working with CHRIC to continue to adjust the COVID-19 testing strategy to balance demand for tests with laboratory capacity and ensure testing follows identified priorities. Tests are completed in three general categories in Ottawa and across the province. First, for public health purposes related to case and contact management and controlling outbreaks. When someone tests positive for COVID-19, OPH conducts contact tracing to identify contacts at risk for infection to stop the chain of transmission. In addition to self-isolation or self-monitoring of contacts, testing is used to identify those who may have become infected. When there is an outbreak in a congregate setting or workplace, staff and residents with the closest contact are tested, but depending upon the scenario, individuals on one floor or in the entire setting are tested as part of disease control actions. Second, ongoing “surveillance” testing occurs in congregate settings. CHRIC and OPH are taking a risk-based approach so that congregate settings that face greater challenges to infection prevention and control complete testing more frequently. The frequency and approach will be further defined by the province. The last category of testing is of the broader public that may be at risk of infection with COVID-19. People who have COVID-19-like symptoms are a priority for testing as soon as possible after symptoms appear. The testing of more asymptomatic people may provide more information about the geographic distribution of infections and hopefully help identify sources of exposure in the community to enable action to stop transmission. Any Ottawa resident who feels they need a test, even if they are not showing symptoms, can present for testing. In addition to the COVID-19 Assessment Centre and Care Clinics, some family doctors’ offices are providing this service, and mobile services are available for populations with need by referral. OPH still recommends using the COVID-19 self-assessment tool if you are worried you were exposed to COVID-19 or have symptoms. Daily screening of workers for symptoms of COVID-19 With workplaces increasingly reopening, OPH is encouraging daily screening of everyone working in the workplace by asking people if they have symptoms of COVID-19, such as fever and cough, sore throat or cold symptoms. Symptomatic people should go home, self-isolate and seek COVID-19 testing. Tests are currently being turned around in about a day. Screening tools are available on OPH’s businesses and workplaces webpage at ottawapublichealth.ca. OPH encourages individuals to seek medical care if feeling unwell by contacting your healthcare provider. Dr. Brent Moloughney Living with COVID-19 As we adapt to living with COVID-19, controlling the rate of transmission and the number of cases will help keep this virus under control. Only a few cases at the beginning of the pandemic in Ottawa required us to ramp up public health measures. At that time, the number of infections was doubling every three to four days. Until there is a vaccine or an effective treatment, while there is COVID-19 infection in Ottawa, public health advice includes practicing physical distancing, hand hygiene, wearing a cloth mask when physical distancing is not possible and limiting your contacts; all these measures are going to be part of our new normal. Warm weather has finally arrived, businesses are reopening and more people are going back to work. This is good for our mental health and the economy, and we need to be wise with our actions as we continue to live with COVID-19. I’m happy to see more people wearing masks when out in public places. This shows that people are getting the message to wear a mask when physical distancing may not be possible. This will become our new normal as the city reopens. Remember: my mask protects you and your mask protects me. We are following the provincial framework to reopen which includes monitoring four dimensions: virus spread and containment, health care system capacity, public health behaviours and testing and tracing capacity. Questions are arising about what is permissible and what is not as provincial orders change and many provincial restrictions remain in place. Please continue to use the principle of protecting yourselves and others as you choose activities. Examples of high-risk activities include having guests over, going to crowded places and participating in team or contact sports. Low-risk activities include going to less-crowded beaches or parks, enjoying a hobby alone like bird watching or shopping online with home delivery or curbside pickup options (preferably locally). I know Ottawa is a resilient city. We’ve been through challenges before. And we’ve always worked together to address them and come out on the other side.

May 27, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches

I am saddened, disturbed and concerned about what was reported in the Canadian Armed Forces report (OP Laser – JTFC Observations in long-term care facilities in Ontario). I am supportive of the Ontario government’s immediate action to investigate further in long-term care homes (LTCH) across the province. Everyone deserves proper care and a safe home. OPH is continuing to work with healthcare partners to provide infection prevention and control (IPAC) support LTCH to control COVID-19 in our community. Homes in outbreak are contacted almost daily and regular on-site visits enable direct assessment of IPAC practices in the homes. Every LTCH and retirement home is rated every day in terms of needs for support, whether for IPAC training or supplies, and as it relates to staffing. In other cities, the military has been brought in when staffing levels could not be met. Here in Ottawa, LTCHs in greatest need have been paired with hospitals and the Champlain Health Region Incident Command (CHRIC) monitors how hospitals are meeting staffing requests of homes, as well as works to build capacity of homes to hire needed support. The LTCH regulator’s inspectors have been kept informed about work underway in Ottawa-based homes. Beat the heat We are currently experiencing our first heatwave of this summer, which will be challenging in a different way this year. Heat warnings mean extra precautions need to be taken by everyone. Some of the usual ways we cool off are not yet available this summer because of measures put in place to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Please think ahead and plan for ways to stay cool and keep in touch with others who may not be able to stay cool, especially during a heat warning. Some ways to protect yourself and help others during hot weather: Cool off in an air-conditioned space when available.

Cool off in the shade or at City of Ottawa parks and greenspaces.

Use a fan and mist your skin with water. The City of Ottawa has set up four emergency cooling centres to provide relief from the heat to residents in need. The emergency cooling centers are set up to ensure users can practice proper physical distancing and will have access to washrooms and water. Residents should bring a cloth mask with them to the cooling centres if they have one. Emergency cooling centres will be open Tuesday, May 26 from 3 pm to 7 pm, and will operate on Wednesday, May 27 and Thursday May 28 from 11 am to 7 pm. We expect this heat wave to subside by end of day Thursday. The emergency cooling centres are located at the following City facilities: Ron Kolbus Centre: 102 Greenview Avenue

Hunt Club Community Centre: 3320 Paul Anka Drive

Sandy Hill Community Centre: 250 Somerset Street East

St-Laurent Complex: 525 Coté Street Visit OPH’s Extreme Heat and Humidity page for more information. Testing OPH continues to follow guidance provided by the Ontario Ministry of Health regarding testing. Any Ottawa resident who feels they need a test, even if they are not showing symptoms, can present for testing. Note that this may lead to longer waits to access testing if many people show up. In addition to the COVID-19 Assessment Centre and Care Clinics, some family doctors’ offices are providing this service, and mobile services are available for populations with need. OPH still recommends using the COVID-19 self-assessment tool if you are worried you were exposed to COVID-19 or have symptoms. We continue to work with healthcare partners to ensure this increased testing capacity is best used to find out where the virus is in the community and break chains of transmission. Mental health support​ Unfortunately, as is often the case during a difficult time, we are seeing that mental health concerns and issues are on the rise, perhaps exacerbated because residents may not have access to their regular coping strategies. ​The Ottawa Distress Centre has seen a significant spike in calls for help to access mental health and addiction supports and for people in crisis. ​Increases in stress, anxiousness, sadness and loneliness have been highlighted from local service providers. ​ ​OPH and our community and hospital partners have come together to better support residents. ​We are very proud of our partners supporting mental health and grateful for the work they have been doing. ​Some examples include the Royal Ottawa's C-PROMPT clinic providing ongoing counselling services, which received over 400 referrals since it launched on April 16, and the Royal's Health Care Worker Mental Health Clinic providing clinical services to healthcare workers and paramedics. ​The Ottawa Health Team and partner agencies, including OPH, are providing the Counselling Connect service for same-day or next-day phone or video counselling. And, as part of the Kids Come First Health Team, Youth Services Bureau (YSB) has modified their 24/7 crisis service to help youth and families get connected to the right Child and Youth Mental Health and Addictions service in Ottawa. ​​Visit OPH’s Mental Health and COVID-19 page for additional resources. Living with COVID-19 I am pleased to share that when OPH contact tracers follow-up with COVID-19 positive cases, contacts per case dropped from approximately20 contacts to ​an average of five. This shows that people are being smart about distancing and helping to continue plank the curve. Despite this progress, we only have a small margin of safety if we want to continue to pin down the virus. If we increase our close contacts too widely and too quickly, the number of cases and outbreaks may rise sharply, which will put a burden on the health care system – something we have fortunately avoided so far. As we reopen and are no longer focusing on “just staying home,” we need to be smart about distancing, engaging in lower risk activities and learning to live with the virus. Keep protecting others by wearing a cloth mask when a two-metre distance cannot be kept and limiting your contacts. We are working with various partners to develop a supply of cloth masks for those who will have difficulty accessing or purchasing a mask. I hope to share more details as we finalize those details and partnerships. NEW: Ottawa COVID-19 Dashboard We’ve been exploring different measures to better convey how OPH is monitoring COVID-19’s spread in the community, which is especially important now that restrictions have begun to ease and the province is reopening. Today, we launched the Ottawa COVID-19 Dashboard to provide this information to the public in a user-friendly format. We’ve introduced a colour-coding system to let people know what is the bottom-line. On a scale from red, orange, yellow and green, we are currently in the orange category. The colour rating is based on our public health and health system capacity, our ability to test and track the virus and on current spread in the community. This new public dashboard, which will be updated daily, will hopefully help residents better understand the situation and the impact of their actions. Each of us matter and each of us will help determine the trajectory of the number of infections in our community and our freedoms into the future.

May 25, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches

Thank you to everyone who practiced physical distancing over what was another beautiful weekend in Ottawa. Spending time in nature can have positive impacts on our mental health and the sunshine and warmer temperatures makes being outdoors much more enticing for many of us. I want to continue to stress the importance that as we go about reopening Ottawa and resuming activities, we must do so in a smart way, which includes keeping our two metre distance from others and wearing a mask in close contact with people outside our households. The likelihood and severity of a second wave is largely determined by our actions; what we do today will impact our future freedoms. Testing strategy Yesterday Premier Doug Ford stated that anyone in Ontario who is worried about having been exposed to COVID-19 can present for testing even if not showing symptoms. Ottawa Public Health (OPH) and the COVID-19 Assessment Centre & COVID-19 Care Clinics are awaiting further guidance provided by the Ontario Ministry of Health regarding testing. Any Ottawa resident who feels they need a test, even if they are not showing symptoms of illness, can now go for testing at the COVID-19 Assessment Centre or the COVID-19 Care Clinics and should not be turned away unless volumes are significant. Populations at highest risk for COVID-19 transmission like healthcare workers and people with symptoms of illness will need to be prioritized if demand outstrips capacity. The available test detects COVID-19 virus in the body, not antibodies, so the test cannot tell you if you have had COVID-19 infection in the past. Since yesterday’s provincial announcement, we have seen increased numbers of individuals presenting for testing at the COVID-19 Assessment Centre and COVID-19 Care Clinics. If you do present for testing, please be prepared for longer wait times and wear a mask if you are able to do so. When wait times are significant, priority will be given to residents from high-risk groups and those showing symptoms. Our website has been updated to reflect this change in testing: please see www.OttawaPublicHealth.ca/Coronavirus for more details. We expect a formal testing strategy to be announced by the ministry later this week. In addition to the COVID-19 Assessment Centre and Care Clinics, some family doctors offices are providing this service, and mobile services are available for populations with need. We will be announcing further options for accessing COVID19 tests in the future.I am pleased that our labs have been able to increase testing capacity. As it stands, the Champlain region is able to process approximately 1,900 tests per day. We are working with healthcare partners to ensure this increased testing capacity is best used tofind out where the virus is in the community and break chains of transmission, with a focus on populations at highest risk. For more information on testing, please visit ottawapublichealth.ca. Reopening cautiously We’ve been asked about the number of cases rising in Ontario and whether it really is the right time to be reopening. At this point, increases in cases are mostly in the Greater Toronto Area, not in Ottawa. We will continue to monitor the situation locally and inform the public; people need to know what is happening where they live. Last Friday, Dr. Doug Manuel shared a cautionary note on reopening: while everyone in Ottawa has contributed to flattening the curve, we cannot move forward as though the virus is gone. We still have outbreaks and a stable level of hospitalizations in Ottawa. We must find ways to live with this virus. Our goal is to resume activities in a way that decreases risk of transmission – keeping distance between ourselves and supporting businesses’ employees’ health and protecting others by wearing masks when within two metres of someone. Heat preparedness Hot weather has come early this year in Ottawa and southern Ontario. To reduce the burden on our health care system, I want to remind residents of ways to prevent heat-related illnesses. Heat and high humidity can be difficult to deal with, especially for people at risk such as older adults, infants, outdoor workers and people with pre-existing health conditions. Ottawa Public Health is encouraging residents to get ready for the heat by having a plan on how they will stay cool and prevent heat related illnesses. With many of our usual places to cool off not open right now, such as libraries, pools and shopping malls we will have to rely on other means to cool off. Cool water and the use of fans or air conditioning are two very effective ways of staying cool. Some good reminders to prevent heat related illnesses include: Drink plenty of water to stay hydrated

Cool off in the shade or at a park or greenspace.

Use a fan and mist your skin with water

Take cool baths and showers as often as needed

Soak hands and/or feet in cool water

Keep your home cool by closing blinds and curtains during the day

Stay connected with people in your community who have a difficult time coping with hot weather and those who live alone. Check on them regularly.

Practice sun safety. For more information visit ottawapublichealth.ca/beattheheat. Hot weather concerns and face masks: Wearing a mask is important to decrease transmission of COVID-19 in any indoor setting where it may be difficult to maintain at least two-metre distancing or the room or corridor is small. Wearing a mask may not be necessary outdoors (where higher temperatures may be more of a concern) if distances can be maintained. Masks do become more uncomfortable in hot temperatures, but they will still work. The general public should plan outdoor outings for the coolest times of the day and take breaks in the shade or a cool environment if they are finding a face mask uncomfortable in the heat. For people undertaking physical exertion in heat, a mask can make the effort more difficult. Decreasing intensity/volume of work, more frequent rests, and more cooling breaks may be necessary. Discuss your health needs with your employer. Paramedic Services Week This week is Paramedic Services Week, an opportunity to recognize the invaluable work these frontline workers commit to every day. Our paramedics are on the front lines during this fight against COVID-19 and have played an integral role in responding to and preventing the spread of COVID-19. On behalf of Ottawa Public Health, thank you Ottawa paramedics for being there to help protect the health and well-being of all Ottawa residents.

May 22, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches

At the end of this first week of reopening, and as the warmer weather appears to be here to stay, many people may be feeling like we have entered a new phase of this pandemic, and they would be correct. And, now is not the time to ease up on our efforts that have been keeping this virus pinned down. We are still learning how we can live with COVID-19 in our community while continuing to do some of the activities that we enjoy. I can’t say enough that we must continue to keep physical distancing and wear a cloth mask in situations when we can’t keep a two-metre distance from others outside our household. These activities prevent infections. We are still in this together as a community to protect ourselves and others. As we resume some of our usual activities and routines like shopping or grabbing take-out coffee, perhaps seeing others we have not seen in a long time at that two-meter distance, you may experience a variety of emotions. I for one got a little emotional yesterday when I saw the usual person serving in the coffee shop down the street when it reopened after two months. This is normal during times of stress and uncertainty and when we see signs of overcoming adversity. Thank you so much for your efforts in the first phase of the pandemic response and for your resilience to continue your hard work and share ideas on how we can live within this new normal. Testing strategy Testing to detect as many COVID19 infections in our community as we can is another one of the efforts that will help keep the virus pinned down as we begin to reopen Ottawa. I’d like to remind everyone that testing is now available to anyone with suspected COVID-19 symptoms. Many family physicians’ offices are open, so please check with them first. And, the assessment centre, care clinics and laboratories have the capacity to offer this testing for everyone that needs it. By getting tested, you are helping us find every case we can to stop transmission of COVID-19; this information helps us to detect cases more quickly, understand what transmission is occurring in the community, investigate potential sources and identify outbreaks earlier. The testing strategy continues to evolve based on the needs of the community, testing capacity as well as provincial guidance. Currently, discussions are underway about in what situations it makes sense to test people who are asymptomatic. We currently test people who are asymptomatic in situations of outbreaks in congregate care settings. Ottawa’s testing capacity has grown significantly since the declaration of the virus in Canada, but we still do not have the capacity to test everyone in Ottawa. We’re working closely with our healthcare, provincial and federal partners to best use our testing capacity. We encourage employers and organizations to consider using a screening questionnaire available on OPH’s website that your staff and volunteers can use to self-assess for COVID-19 symptoms before starting their work day. Any employees with even mild symptoms should not work when ill and are strongly encouraged to present for testing. Focus on prevention I know that testing gets a lot of attention, but prevention is essential and has always been a key focus for the work of public health. We would much rather prevent cases of COVID-19 in our community than chase the virus down once it starts spreading. We know that prevention saves the health care system dollars, but it also saves lives. Not getting sick in the first place is better for everyone, particularly when there is no effective cure for the infection. Early public health advice to practice physical distancing has prevented transmission in our community, and I thank all of you who continue to practice preventive measures such as physical distancing, washing your hands frequently, not touching your face and wearing a cloth mask when in close contact with people outside your household. Testing is not enough. These measures are important to continue to limit transmission in the community. Case and contact management Connecting with people with confirmed COVID-19 and their contacts, to support them to do their part to manage their illness and decrease further transmission, is another essential public health measure in place to help keep the virus pinned down as we begin to reopen Ottawa. When OPH is notified of a confirmed case of COVID-19, we call the individual within 24 hours and begin the process of contact tracing. Through our case and contact management work, OPH is seeing that the number of close contacts per case is now often less than five and contacts are usually household contacts. Before physical distancing and self-isolation measures were introduced, OPH was notifying approximately 15 to 20 close contacts per case. We will continue to monitor the impact of reopening and how this influences the number of close contacts per case. Modelling shows that in Ottawa, if contacts rise by even 20 per cent, we can anticipate to see hospitalizations increase. I encourage everyone to get outside and enjoy this beautiful weather. Please keep doing what you're doing to limit your total contacts: stay two metres apart, wash your hands and wear a cloth mask when you can’t keep physical distance. Your actions are appreciated and will be what allows us to live in a more sustainable way in the future.

May 20, 2020 - Special statement from Dr. Vera Etches

During the next few months, public health’s role will be to continue to: engage with residents and stakeholders to inform next steps,

engage with businesses and organizations to reopen safely,

monitor the number of confirmed cases, connect with people with confirmed COVID-19 and their contacts, and

control outbreaks in the community. Engaging with the community One way that Ottawa Public Health (OPH) has engaged with residents is through an online engagement platform. Today is the last day for residents to provide feedback on our survey during the first phase of the engagement platform called COVID-19: Share your thoughts. Please consider contributing your thoughts at engage.ottawa.ca/covid19 if you have not yet joined this conversation. Your feedback will help inform our approach to easing restrictions. Since launching on May 1, we have heard from more than 1,500 residents, and more than 9,000 residents have accessed information on the page. More than 90% of respondents have shared they understand why we must continue practicing physical distancing, and that they will continue to do so even as we are able to ease restrictions. Many respondents are open to mitigation measures like wearing non-medical cloth masks (89%) and scheduling outings to limit crowding (70%). This is good news. More information on the next phase of our engagement will be provided in the near future. Outdoor recreational amenities Yesterday the reopening of outdoor recreational amenities came into effect. One of the most common concerns we’ve heard from residents during the COVID-19 response was lack of ability to engage in activities in outdoor green space, so this is welcome news. It means more outdoor space for everyone to take advantage of the nice weather and to get out and be active. Business toolkit OPH is pleased to have supported the development of the City’s business reopening toolkit. Getting people back to work safely is a priority. We are here to support businesses to do that during this next phase. Examples of resources in the toolkit include setting up your space to allow for physical distancing, cleaning and disinfecting, screening tools for employees, and signage. If businesses are not ready to open, they don’t need to. If they are successfully offering online deliveries, curbside pick-up, or individual appointments, we encourage them continue to use those strategies. These strategies allow businesses and customers to maintain physical distancing which has been key in keeping infections down in our community so far. I want to reiterate what Chair Egli said: Recommended physical distancing measures don’t change with reopening. Please remember to continue to stay two metres away from people who do not live in your household, and if you cannot maintain this two-metre distance OPH recommends you wear a cloth mask. Mapping of confirmed COVID-19 in Ottawa We have begun to look at the data of confirmed cases in different ways. Today we launched a new map that reflects the rate of COVID-19 infection in residents by ward. This map, which will be updated every two weeks starting next week, can be found on our COVID-19 Epidemiology Update web page. While it is clear that COVID-19 is present in every single community within Ottawa, this map provides a snapshot of COVID-19 across Ottawa, based on ward geography. I want to stress that these maps cannot be used to identify “COVID-19 hot spots” in Ottawa. OPH is sharing this information in the interest of transparency. Areas with lower or higher rates are not more or less safe from COVID-19 