KEY FACTS 11 a.m.: Ontario reports 165 new cases

10:22 a.m.: Inflatable pool sales rose 107 per cent year over year

10:19 a.m.: California’s coronavirus infections surpass N.Y.

The latest coronavirus news from Canada and around the world Wednesday. This file will be updated throughout the day. Web links to longer stories if available.

6:23 p.m.: As of 6 p.m. Wednesday, Ontario’s public health units were reporting 40,138 confirmed and probable cases of COVID-19, including 2,789 deaths, according to the Star’s latest count.

After several days of rising case totals, the units reported a lower total of 133 new infections in the last 24 hours, slightly below the recent average.

From June 29 to July 5, the health units reported 153 new infections per day. The next week, that average fell to 117 cases daily. Last week, it rose slightly to an average of 149.

Ontario saw just one new fatality reported Wednesday, in Toronto.

Earlier, the province reported 128 patients are currently hospitalized with COVID-19, including 37 in an intensive care unit, of whom 19 are on a ventilator — numbers that are near the lowest the province has reported since first publishing hospitalization data in early April.

The province says its data is accurate to 4 p.m. the previous day. The province also cautions its latest count of total deaths may be incomplete or out of date due to delays in the reporting system, saying that in the event of a discrepancy, “data reported by (the health units) should be considered the most up to date.”

The Star’s count includes some patients reported as “probable” COVID-19 cases, meaning they have symptoms and contacts or travel history that indicate they very likely have the disease, but have not yet received a positive lab test.

2:15 p.m.: Toronto medical officer of health Dr. Eileen de Villa said there have been 58 new cases over the last two days, and expressed concern that younger people are getting infected. More 20 to 39 years olds getting the virus.

“I’m very concerned about this” de Villa said.

She said residents must remain vigilant or there’s a risk of resurgence.

“I have heard many people say they believe that COVID-19 is over ... this is simply not true.”

1:10 p.m.: In his daily address, Premier Doug Ford he has a “phenomenal relationship” with MPP Belinda Karahalios, who he saw twice last week but he says never mentioned her concerns with Bill 195.

Ford ejected Karahalios from the Progressive Conservative caucus for voting against controversial legislation expanding his government’s emergency authority.

“Belinda Karahalios will no longer be sitting as a member of the Progressive Conservative caucus,” Ford said in a terse statement issued Tuesday night, less than an hour after Karahalios broke ranks.

1 p.m.: Nova Scotia’s back-to-school plan aims to have all elementary and high school students back in classrooms by Sept. 8.

Education Minister Zach Churchill said today that while the objective is for schools to return to 100 per cent capacity in the fall, the plan includes measures to address the advent of a second wave of COVID-19.

School rooms will be reorganized to increase spacing between desks and students will be encouraged to limit contact with peers outside their classroom.

Staff and students will be required to wear a mask in common areas where physical distancing is difficult, such as hallways and school buses, but not inside classes.

Students are asked to bring their own computers to school and the provincial government says it acquired an additional 14,000 computers at a cost of $4 million to support those with limited access to technology.

If a COVID-19 outbreak occurs during the academic year, schools will move to a blended learning model with smaller class sizes and home learning for older students.

11:45 a.m.: Quebec is reporting four new deaths attributed to COVID-19 and 142 new cases of the disease linked to the novel coronavirus in the last 24 hours.

The province has reported a total of 5,662 COVID-19-related deaths and 57,938 confirmed cases since the pandemic began.

Even as cases have climbed slightly in recent weeks, hospitalizations continue to drop.

The province reports there are 235 people in hospital today, which is 12 fewer than the prior day. Of those, 16 people are in intensive care, an increase of one.

Health authorities conducted 12,217 COVID-19 tests on July 20, the last day for which data is available.

11:30 a.m.: Two groups representing thousands of post-secondary students are calling on the Trudeau Liberals to abandon its troubled volunteer program and push its $900-million funding to other student supports.

The program the Liberals first unveiled in April proposed paying students up to $5,000 toward education costs based on the number of hours they volunteer.

But its rollout has stumbled after the group chosen to run it, WE Charity, backed out amid an ethical uproar involving Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.

The Canadian Federation of Students and the Canadian Alliance of Student Associations say it’s clear the program won’t provide the financial help students are looking for.

The CFS warns students may be unable to accumulate enough hours to receive grants because it’s almost August and there is no clarity on when the program will launch.

11:20 a.m.: Nursing-home residents, families, neighbours and close friends are allowed indoor visits as of today.

Ontario Minister of Long-Term Care Merrilee Fullerton announced earlier that the new rules that will permit indoor visits of no more than two friends or relatives at a time.

Visitors can help with eating or washing and can provide emotional sustenance for people who have declined from months of loneliness and depression.

Before mid-March, when visitors for all but palliative residents were locked out by COVID restrictions, many families and friends provided hours of care for their loved ones, freeing up staff to spend time with other residents.

11 a.m.: Ontario is reporting 165 new cases of COVID-19 today, as well as two new deaths related to the virus.

The total number of cases now stands at 38,107, which includes 2,755 deaths and 33,812 resolved cases. There were 207 resolved cases newly reported today.

The province says it was able to complete nearly 23,000 tests the previous day.

Health Minister Christine Elliott says just over half of today’s cases came from people under the age of 40, similar to new case numbers released on Tuesday.

She says 28 of the province’s 34 public health units are reporting five or fewer cases, with 18 of them reporting no new cases. Ottawa had 33 new cases, with 25 in Peel and 39 in Windsor-Essex.

Read the full story from the Star’s Rob Ferguson.

10:22 a.m. Inflatable pools are driving a deluge of toy sales during the COVID-19 pandemic as consumers try to reclaim summer by enhancing at-home leisure for their children, their pets and their feet.

Market research firm NPD Canada says inflatable pool sales rose 107 per cent year over year between April and June, when lockdowns were in effect across the country.

Analyst Joan Ramsay says the pools, like other items seeing a surge such as puzzles and board games, offer a communal activity for families — dogs included — and a refreshing distraction for kids stuck at home.

NPD found inflatable pools, which typically cost between $100 and $600, were among a flood of larger online purchases that included play sets and trampolines, while sales of smaller toys dropped off slightly in April and May as in-person impulse buys became unavailable during store shutdowns.

Over the past three months, pools — the No. 1 toy item in May — were surpassed only by puzzles, with sales of jigsaws of 1,000 pieces or more growing 150 per cent year over year as homebound consumers flocked to the activity.

Total toy sales rose 16 per cent, while video games enjoyed a sustained sales boost of 57 per cent.

10:19 a.m. California’s confirmed coronavirus cases have topped 409,000, surpassing New York for most in the nation.

John’s Hopkins University data showed Wednesday that California now has about 1,200 more cases than New York.

However, New York’s 72,302 deaths are by far the highest total in the country and nine times more than California’s tally, and its rate of confirmed infections of about 2,100 per 100,000 people is twice California’s rate.

California is by far the most populous U.S. state, at nearly 40 million people, while New York has about 19.5 million.

9:55 a.m. The PGA Tour Series-China season has been cancelled because of the pandemic.

The China-based tour’s executive director says attempts to move the qualifying tournaments to other sites in Asia were not practical and restricted access into mainland China made it too difficult to stage tournaments in 2020.

Greg Carlson says “staging a tour based in China with players from five different continents is just not feasible at this time.”

The tour is owned by the PGA Tour and operates in partnership with the Chinese Golf Association. It started in 2014 and is open to all nationalities and attracts players mainly from Asia and the Pacific Rim.

Players who earned membership following the 2019 season will maintain their PGA Tour Series-China status in 2021.

9:50 a.m. The International Tennis Federation plans to resume its lower-level World Tennis Tour the week of Aug. 17 and its junior and beach tennis tours two weeks later when the U.S. Open is scheduled to begin.

All ITF tours have been suspended since March because of the coronavirus pandemic.

The governing body says it has not decided on return dates for the senior or wheelchair tours but neither will have tournaments take place before Aug. 31.

The ITF also announced its COVID-19 protocols for its tournaments and players.

That includes telling participants they shouldn’t travel to tournaments if they tested positive for the virus within seven days or were exposed to anyone with the virus or its symptoms within 14 days.

9 a.m. Sources confirmed to the Star — ’round about midnight — that the Blue Jays will call PNC Park in Pittsburgh their home.

With one proviso: local government down there has to sign off on the plan.

And we all know how the federal government up here scuttled the Jays’ desperado pitch to use the Rogers Centre for their home games this summer.

So, it’s never signed in blood until the pols have their final say. But barring any last-minute objections, the Jays will be lodgers at beautiful PNC Park, cohabiting with the Pirates.

Three days left before their regular season launches Friday in Tampa, which is cutting it extremely fine.

Hazel Mae of Sportsnet was first to tweet the news. Speculation, however, had for several days been lasering in on Steel City South, rather than Camden Yards in Baltimore or — worst option — Salhen Field in Buffalo, home of the Bisons, Toronto’s triple-A affiliate.

A handful of Jays had already voiced their displeasure over that looming possibility. Said Randal Grichuk earlier Tuesday: “Most guys don’t want to play in a triple-A ballpark. Training room, weight room, those aren’t really up to big-league standards.”

Read the full story from the Star’s Rosie DiManno

8:24 a.m. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar announced Wednesday that the U.S. has signed a contract with Pfizer for delivery in December of the first 100 million doses of a COVID-19 vaccine the pharmaceutical company is working to develop.

The U.S. could buy another 500 million doses under the agreement, Azar said.

“Now those would, of course, have to be safe and effective” and be approved by the Food and Drug Administration, Azar said during an appearance on Fox News.

Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE announced separately that the agreement is with HHS and the Defence Department for a vaccine candidate the companies are developing jointly.

Get the latest in your inbox Never miss the latest news from the Star, including up-to-date coronavirus coverage, with our email newsletters Sign Up Now

The agreement is part of President Donald Trump’s Operation Warp Speed vaccine program, under which multiple COVID-19 vaccines are being developed simultaneously. The program aims to deliver 300 million doses of a safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine by January 2021, according to HHS.

8:05 a.m. Rogers Communications Inc. missed expectations as its net profit was cut by more than half in the second quarter on a 17 per cent drop in revenues.

The Toronto-based telecom company, which warned that its results would be weakened by the challenges of COVID-19, earned $279 million or 54 cents per diluted share.

That’s down from $591 million or $1.15 per share a year earlier.

Excluding one-time items, adjusted net income was $310 million or 60 cents per share for the period ended June 30, compared with $597 million or 48 cents per share in the second quarter of 2019.

Revenues were $3.15 billion, down from $3.78 billion a year earlier.

Rogers was expected to report 71 cents per share in adjusted profits on $3.18 billion of revenues, according to financial markets data firm Refinitiv.

“As Canada’s business environment slowly improves, we will rely on our strong balance sheet, world-class networks, and leading market share position to support long-term growth and drive shareholder value,” said president and CEO Joe Natale.

7:47 a.m. U.S. health officials agreed to pay $1.95 billion for 100 million doses of a vaccine made by Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech SE, the latest step in an effort to fight the coronavirus pandemic.

The companies will receive payment upon the receipt of the doses, following regulatory authorization or approval, according to a statement. The government also can acquire up to an additional 500 million doses.

Nations around the world have begun ordering vaccines that are still being tested as part of their efforts to try to blunt the impact of the pandemic that’s roiled economies and killed more than 600,000 people since the beginning of the year. The U.S. has already ordered experimental shots developed by the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca Plc.

The vaccine would be available to the American people for free, according to the government.

Pfizer shares rose more than 5 per cent in pre-market trading. BioNTech climbed about 7 per cent.

7:45 a.m. Tokyo Governor Yuriko Koike told residents to avoid unnecessary trips outdoors as much as possible during a forthcoming four-day weekend as the total number of coronavirus cases in the city topped 10,000.

Japan’s capital had another 238 cases on Wednesday, as the country heads into a long weekend that was originally scheduled to celebrate the start of the now-postponed Tokyo Olympic Games.

“This long weekend is going to be critical in preventing further spread of the virus,” Koike said in a briefing Wednesday.

Hospitalizations in Tokyo have jumped almost fivefold over the past month, though authorities have stressed the medical system is not under stress. Just 14 of those hospitalized are listed as serious cases, in an ICU or on a ventilator, and the city has had only two deaths in the past month. The city had over 3,800 cases so far this month, more than the previous peak in April when the city entered its state of emergency.

7:41 a.m. The government has quietly relaxed a requirement to fingerprint prospective new federal hires as part of security screening, a move prompted by the need for physical distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic.

A temporary change to the federal standard on security screening allows departments and agencies subject to the Policy on Government Security to grant conditional security statuses and clearances, the Treasury Board Secretariat said.

The government must ensure it can effectively respond to public needs during COVID-19 by hiring badly needed workers, the secretariat said.

“This has required urgently increasing the workforce necessary to implement the government’s emergency measures and to provide support where urgently needed, like health-care workers in Indigenous and northern communities.”

The secretariat said that given the physical distancing practices recommended by the Public Health Agency of Canada, it is “not always possible to obtain fingerprints,” a common step in carrying out a criminal record check during screening.

The decision to grant a conditional security screening clearance under the temporary change in practice is the responsibility of the deputy head within each department or agency, based on individual circumstances.

Agencies continue to “diligently assess” candidates using security screening measures in a manner that does not present a public health risk, the secretariat said.

“This includes, for example, verifying a candidate’s identity and background, information, education and professional credentials and performing a credit check.

“This may include conducting name-based checks for law enforcement inquiries as an alternative to using digital fingerprints or extending the validity of existing screening levels that are due for revalidation during this period.”

All candidates for employment with the government are also required to self-declare the existence of a criminal record on the security screening application form.

4 a.m. Finance Minister Bill Morneau will appear Wednesday before a House of Commons committee that is probing a cancelled agreement for WE Charity to run a student-volunteer program.

Morneau has apologized for not recusing himself from the cabinet discussions and vote on the agreement, given his daughters have ties to WE — including one who works in an administrative arm of the organization.

He will be the latest cabinet minister to be grilled over the aborted deal that would have seen WE receive more than $43.5 million to oversee a program with a budget of up to $912 million.

Morneau, like Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, is being investigated by the federal ethics watchdog for possible violations of conflict of interest rules.

On Tuesday, Canada’s top bureaucrat said he couldn’t see not having the finance minister and prime minister involved in discussions about a program as big in scope and price as the Canada Student Service Grant program.

The program proposed paying students up to $5,000 toward education costs based on the number of hours they volunteer.

The Liberals have said the non-partisan public service recommended going with WE as it was the only organization in the country to administer a program as quickly and as broadly as what the government wanted.

In early July, the organization handed back control of the program to the government amid the controversy about its connections to Trudeau. The organization has paid speaking fees to his mother and brother.

The finance committee also heard Tuesday from the head of the Public Service Alliance of Canada that public servants could have delivered the program, while lawyer Joshua Mandryk raised concerns about effectively paying students below minimum wage and calling it volunteering.

The Canadian Federation of Students is calling on the government to abandon the program and push all the money into an emergency benefit for out-of-work students.

The group warns students may be unable to accumulate enough hours to receive grants because it’s almost August and there is no clarity on when the program will launch.

“Students have waited for this program to roll out since April and now they’re told they have to wait even longer,” national chair Sofia Descalzi said in a statement.

“This is unacceptable.”

Wednesday 5:15 a.m.: The delayed Tokyo Olympics could not be held next year if conditions surrounding the coronavirus pandemic continue as they are, the president of the organizing committee said Wednesday.

In an interview with Japanese broadcaster NHK, Yoshiro Mori said he was hopeful the situation would improve and suggested a vaccine was the key.

“If this kind of situation (with COVID-19) continues, is it possible to hold the games?” Mori was asked by NHK.

“If current situation continues, we couldn’t,” Mori replied, speaking in Japanese.

The Tokyo Olympics are scheduled to open on July 23, 2021 — a year from Thursday. A small, 15-minute ceremony without fans is scheduled for Thursday at the new national stadium to mark the date.

Tuesday 5:35 p.m.: As of 5 p.m., Ontario’s public health units were reporting 40,005 confirmed and probable cases of COVID-19, including 2,788 deaths.

The province passed the 40,000-case mark with 188 new infections reported in the last 24 hours, the most in any single-day so far this month.

Meanwhile, the province saw three more fatal cases reported, all in Toronto.

Earlier Tuesday, the province reported 120 patients are currently hospitalized with COVID-19, including 36 in an intensive care unit, of whom 23 are on a ventilator — numbers that are near the lowest the province has reported since first publishing hospitalization data in early April.

Read more of Tuesday’s coronavirus news