to get a good price after bargaining; to get oil by drilling; to get information.

to cause to be in one's possession or succeed in having available for one's use or enjoyment; obtain; acquire: to get a good price after bargaining; to get oil by drilling; to get information.

to cause to be in one's possession or succeed in having available for one's use or enjoyment; obtain; acquire: to get a good price after bargaining; to get oil by drilling; to get information.

to get a birthday present; to get a pension.

to receive or come to have possession, use, or enjoyment of: to get a birthday present; to get a pension.

to receive or come to have possession, use, or enjoyment of: to get a birthday present; to get a pension.

to go after, take hold of, and bring (something) for one's own or for another's purposes; fetch: Would you get the milk from the refrigerator for me?

to cause or cause to become, to do, to move, etc., as specified; effect: to get one's hair cut; to get a person drunk; to get a fire to burn; to get a dog out of a room.

to communicate or establish communication with over a distance; reach: You can always get me by telephone.

to hear or hear clearly: I didn't get your last name.

to acquire a mental grasp or command of; learn: to get a lesson.

to capture; seize: Get him before he escapes!

to receive as a punishment or sentence: to get a spanking; to get 20 years in jail.

to prevail on; influence or persuade: We'll get him to go with us.

to prepare; make ready: to get dinner.

(especially of animals) to beget.

Informal . to affect emotionally: Her pleas got me.

to hit, strike, or wound: The bullet got him in the leg.

Informal . to kill.

Informal . to take vengeance on: I'll get you yet!

to catch or be afflicted with; come down with or suffer from: He got malaria while living in the tropics. She gets butterflies before every performance.

Informal . to puzzle; irritate; annoy: Their silly remarks get me.